Oct 5, 2018
Hayden Center panel

good evening everyone thank you for
coming I am mark Rozelle I serve as the
Dean of the char school of policy and
government here at George Mason
University and we host the Michael V
Hayden center for intelligence policy
and international security I am
delighted to welcome you to the first
Hayden Center event of this academic
year secrets presidents and dissent we
are very pleased to have general Hayden
as a member of the char school faculty
here at George Mason University where he
has been teaching for us for the past
decade and is surprisingly a very
popular instructor in our international
security studies master's degree program
which I suppose I should mention is our
fastest growing graduate program here at
George Mason University and recently
received a very high ranking from u.s.
News & World Report as the number three
program in the country of which we're
very proud the great turnout for this
event I think says a lot about the
importance that many attach to the
issues and problems
our distinguished panel will discuss
this evening I would like to recognize
some of the people who are there here
this evening Congress member former
ambassador and former lieutenant
governor Don Beyer
Thank You Don several members of the
George Mason University Board of
Visitors are here I will just read all
of their names
Horace Blackman leases ook re ignacio
moreno and edward rice and we also have
a Board of Trustee member Sumeet
shrivastava I also acknowledge the
associate dean of the char school Ming
Juan and senior vice president for
finance and administration J Jay Wagner
Davis will be here tonight and the most
important supporter of the Hayden Center
Mike's wife Janine Hayden who will be
critiquing his performance tonight thank
you Jeff although not here tonight I
gratefully acknowledge division the
continued counsel in the support of the
namesake of our school Dwight Schar and
finally I recognize a person who needs
no introduction for most of us here it
has been my privilege to work with
Mason's president on Hill Carrboro for
the past several years he is the sixth
president of George Mason University and
he is now in the seventh year serving in
that role during this time George Mason
University has achieved remarkable
growth outstanding rankings and many of
its academic programs transformational
naming gifts for our law school the
Scalia School and also for the Shar
school among many other accomplishments
so I'm now privileged to welcome our
president on L Cabrera on Hill
thank you all very much and welcome to
George Mason University as a short plug
you may like to know that this is the
largest research university in the
Commonwealth of Virginia and the
youngest year one research university in
the in the country is a really a
remarkable story of growth in a short
period of time that we also recognize
and we're very proud of this as being
one of the most diverse universities in
America and that's actually was
recognized by US News also today and we
always say diversity is our strength but
for diversity of people and ideas to be
our strengths it's important that we
engage in important civil conversations
and that we model especially in today's
world what it means to have
conversations on important issues and
having with people who may think
differently from from one that's why I'm
so excited about what's happening at the
center of the Hayden Center today and I
hope that today serves as a model of the
type of important enlighten civil
conversation that we think ought to be
the norm and in our society we're
fortunate to have general Hayden as a
distinguished visiting professor as then
Dean Roselle mentioned and his ability
to attract such an esteemed panel in
audience demonstrates in the reach and
impact of the school and the role that
it plays in reaching dissecting and
explaining crucial issues general Hayden
were so grateful for the the work that
you do on behalf of the of the
University and I am pleased to welcome
tonight United States representative Don
Beyer who is serving his second term
representing Virginia's 8th
congressional district congressman Baier
serves on the Joint Economic Committee
and the House Committee on Natural
Resources and his vice ranking member of
the Science Space and Technology
Committee and ranking member of the
oversight subcommittee he was as you
heard from
our dean lieutenant-governor he also
served as US ambassador to to
switzerland but i want to to thank
congressman buyer precisely because of
some very thoughtful and important
comments for our university that he made
last spring and he joined science
subcommittee hearing on foreign plots
targeting america's research and
development he spoke very eloquently
about the need for colleges to increase
vigilance on security protections which
we take very very seriously but he also
underlined the fact that foreign talent
in foreign scientists play an absolutely
crucial role in strengthening the
systems of research and innovation in
this country and we cannot take care of
one problem without paying close
attention to the strengths that we have
in that regard so we really appreciate
those comments that you made
representative Beier is certainly no
stranger to Mason he holds an annual
Women's Conference here in the Arlington
campus which is going to be repeated in
this very room as well as the small
business development events and he's
involved in with Mason initiatives
related to environmental issues it is a
pleasure to introduce to you congressman
Don Beyer
good evening I am so fortunate to
represent the eighth District but
especially to represent George Mason
University as a lifelong Washington
attorney and I remember when this was
Kansas department store and and how far
it has come and I I think I can say with
confidence there is no university in the
United States perhaps in the world has
had the meteoric rise in reputation and
capabilities as George Mason so
congratulations and thank you also point
out to the intelligence professionals
tonight that when I graduated from
Williams College in 1972 the first thing
I did was go to Roslyn and apply for a
job at the Central Intelligence Agency
and it was turned away so you know we're
very fortunate to be here at the shore
school of policy and government
Dwight Martha char of been dear friends
for decades and they have built tens of
thousands of new homes through n V Ryan
but now they're helping to build a whole
cadre of policy and governmental
professionals will help us governor well
for generations to come
I feel very privileged to be here
tonight to learn about secrets
presidents and dissent at the most
obvious crossroads in the history of
that intelligence relationship to be
here with this distinguished panel with
generals Hayden clapper Admiral Rogers
director Mudd and our moderator Nicole
Wallace I can't imagine a more
interesting place to be while we wait
for hurricane Florence to hit
and so Thank You general Hayden for
overseeing the creation of the Mykleby
Hayden center for intelligence policy
and international security your dissent
is always uncomfortable for people in
charge it can cost you a point or a game
and a tennis match you can get ejected
from a baseball game you can be held in
contempt of court
but dissent is essential in a democracy
especially the informed dissent of those
most familiar with the issues before us
well general Hayden doesn't need much
introduction with nearly 40 years of
public service he served in a whole
variety of positions throughout her
intelligence community and all over the
world he served in the Air Force
retiring as a four-star general
he had assignments in the National
Security Council the air Intelligence
Agency the UN Command US forces Korea
before being appointed director of the
National Security Agency in 1999 and
then direct with the CIA where he served
from 2006 to 2009 so you know it's quite
a bit about the internal workings of the
intelligence community the
accountability of the intelligence on
which the discussion will focus tonight
before I hand over the state's general
Hayden though I want to take a moment
just to remember the significance of
this day September 11th its grave impact
upon our country and upon our
intelligence community and we persevere
17 years later now thanks to those who
keep us safe
our servicemen our first responders our
intelligence community and so many
others so thank you all for having me
here tonight thank you to general Hayden
and the director of the Hayden Senator
Larry Pfeifer I will look forward to
this vigorous discussion and I'll give
you general Hey
thank you very much congressman
president Cabrera Dean Rozelle thank you
all thank you all for coming this is the
inaugural event of the second year of
the Hayden Center we spent last year
talking about truth tellers in a post
truth world and then director Pfeiffer
and I thought that a nice organizational
concept for year two would be around the
question of accountability with regard
to espionage in a democratic society and
that still was our theme and Larry and I
had laid out a rather predictable course
of events of things we would cover in
the public events for the Hayden Center
and then there was that security
clearance thing that happened and so we
decided that this might actually be a
good opportunity to take advantage of
that controversy to take a look at the
question of presidents and and secrets
and dissent what what are the proper
bounds for that kind of activity in a
free and open society and so that's the
topic here for tonight I'm going to very
briefly introduce the panel members and
invite them to come up one by one you've
got some more detail in your programs
because we really do want to get on to
through the discussion and frankly your
observations and questions before we're
all done so let me first of all
introduce Phil Mudd Phil is a career
analyst at the Central Intelligence
Agency he was the senior analyst in our
counterterrorism center and living what
he thought was a happy life until I
called him one afternoon and said Phil I
need you to go over to the FBI and set
up their intelligence analytic structure
we remain friends
Mike Rogers wonderful career in
America's Navy ended up the last several
years of his career being the director
of the National Security Agency and
commander of the US Cyber Command and
the important thing about Mike's work
there he was in that latter position US
Cyber Command when all the metal is
still malleable he had a very powerful
hand in shaping what it is that command
will be for us in the future
Jim clapper now I could I could shorten
my introduction for Jim by simply naming
the important intelligence positions Jim
has not had but he has been the director
of the Defense Intelligence Agency the
director of the National geospatial
Intelligence Agency he was on my Board
of Advisors when I became director of
the National Security Agency and he's
been the Undersecretary of defense for
intelligence and then our moderator or
referee for tonight's discussion is a
good friend of mine and Nicole Wallace
we work on Patriots in the Bush 43 White
House and as I think all of you know she
is now a regular and a commentator on
MSNBC Nicole we're ready for you thank
you
well so much is made of how much all of
you add enamel Rogers there's still time
for you but all the rest of you add to
the conversation that we have about this
moment in politics this moment in
national security by the roles that you
have on television and so just on behalf
of everyone that gets to watch all of
you and learn from all of you thank you
I want to dive right in to where we find
ourselves because we can never do much
planning because there's always
something happening real-time and you
you know you you gave us a with the name
here dissent you all signed a letter
dissenting from the president's decision
to revoke former CIA director Brennan
security clearances and I want to ask
you about that letter starting with you
general Hayden yeah I want to hear about
that too are you dissented from the
dissenters but let me start with you
dying
yeah that was actually a fairly easy
call no let me read a little bit of it
too okay in case people haven't just to
refresh everyone's mind so you wrote in
part and this was on the president's
decision to revoke the security
clearance a former CIA director Brennan
so you all wrote in you co-signed a
letter that says we have never before
seen the approval or removal of security
clearances used as a political tool as
was done in this case beyond that this
action is quite clearly a signal to
other former and current officials as
individuals who have cherished and
helped preserve the right of Americans
to free speech even when that right has
been used to criticize us that signal is
inappropriate and deeply regrettable so
so the issue frankly I mean to be very
candid I mean the security clearance is
a convenience for all of us but it's
given to us for the benefit of the
government not not for us I mean none of
us you know when I have a CNN hit I
don't go up 123 pulling the Langley
rifle my old files take some notes and
go down to talk to them so the and
frankly the the question of people like
us who
three of the four of us are under
contract to a major news outlet to talk
on the air I mean it's a fair question
should people like us continue to have
security clearances given a role we have
freely chosen and that might mean we
wouldn't do some other things but that's
that's a choice and that's a fair
question that's not the question that's
not the action the action was punishing
John and threatening to punish three of
the four of us on stage with losing our
clearance for political speech and we
just thought that that just although
this is a legitimate conversation over
here this this was punitive action for
for political dissent and although I
don't think any of us would have enjoyed
contesting any of this given all the
personal burdens that that would bring
there was in our view this higher
principle involved that we would be
denied something to which we would
otherwise have been entitled and that we
word end up being denied it for
political speech and that's why it was
actually pretty easy to get signatures I
see you on this a little bit of former
senior intelligence official who's not
as public as the three of you signed his
letter to the name to preserve that
principle you described and and felt
that revoking clearances of a critic
really walked up to a line of not being
an American practice do you do you put
that in the category of a practice that
this president has engaged in that it
comes close to changing who we are as a
country yeah well I mean that's look I
mean you know and Mike Mike is just
retired but yeah are the three of us we
were on TV for a while all right and and
I don't mind being on TV trying to
explain American espionage to the
broader American public I I think that's
a public service but because of the
current circumstances were put in a
position when we do what it was I just
described we seem to be pretty
frequently in opposition to what it is
the president or one of his surrogates
have just said we're gonna lose by that
we're all made uncomfortable by that and
I think the issue
that bites and it's generally applicable
not just to us is that the president as
a person the administration as an
institution doesn't argue the facts of
the case it attacks the character
legitimacy and validity of the other
side and that I mean I'm not saying
that's never happened before in American
history but not to this degree not to
this almost reflexive response to any
degree of criticism and so you Nicole
you and I were talking earlier about
article yesterday for the hill and which
I said I've kind of gotten myself to the
position we're in the in emergency break
glass situation and so we're doing
things that we probably didn't plan on
doing we're not enthused about doing but
we're gonna go do amaral Rogers you
descended from the dissenters you were
at a government that's not what I would
say I chose not to sign a letter okay do
you agree with it fair enough
do you agree with this sentiment so let
me walk you through the thought process
morning first as you've heard a I'm
newly retired I retired from the United
States Navy as of June the 1st so I'm
100 and some odd days into this new life
and as this was unfolding I was struck
by a couple things first I agree with
the fundamental premise that it is the
right of every citizen to express their
views I embrace that and like everybody
on this stage have spent our
professional lives focused on ensuring
that that right remains for all of us I
truly believe it's one of our strengths
for a nation but I had two things that
gave me pause the first that one thing
the teams I've always been a part of our
item remember it's always about outcomes
it's not about activity for the sake of
activity it's always about to get to
outcomes and so I said to myself is this
going to be effective and I just thought
so a group of former senior intelligence
individuals complaining about how
another former senior intelligence
individualist is being treated I'm not
sure is the most effective way to
achieve a very valid address a very
valid concern I applaud animal
McRaven for example I thought what he
did was truly professional and I thought
hey that was really that was really
effective someone who had no dog in the
fight per se directly spoke up to say
look there's a fundamental principle
here I think we need to stand up for it
I also thought pouring gasoline on a
fire is not going to reduce the flame
and we got enough fires burning right
now guys we need to focus on what are
the outcomes we need to achieve as a
nation and remember John and every one
of us with or without a clearance retain
the right to say what we want and do
what we believe is the right thing the
last thing and quite frankly it's
probably what prompted me to do this
tonight this the first time I have done
anything in which media has been there
you know since I've entered this new
life and retired after 37 years the
naval officer the other concern I had
was is this going to make the work
harder of the men and women in the
intelligence profession of the worlds in
our nation today who are doing the job
and as a guy who was on the inside for
part of us who at times being very
honest would say guys this is not
helping because my concern is
intelligence is most effective when the
perception of the customer is that what
they are seeing represents a true
objective analytical assessment that is
not in any way influenced by political
view administration particular policy
and so for me as I've talked to the
teams I have led with in my intelligence
career we must ensure that nothing we do
calls into question the objective nature
of intelligence because I've watched at
times and we have all seen experiences
when that has been called in the
question and you know we're thinking
you're not listening to what we're
saying in the sense that look we think
that's something that's very important
here but instead we're focused on well
are you telling me this because you like
this policy you don't like this policy
and so for me I just thought I agree
with the point the letter is making but
I am concerned that this won't be the
most effective way to make the point and
number two I'm concerned about what this
will do for them
doing that work and the agencies that we
have all been a part of them as a result
I opted not to go this route even as I
recognize John anybody you need to stand
up and see what you believe I don't
question that for one minute
can I press you a little bit since
you're the first one to this is the
first time anyone is hearing from you in
this role and you worked for Donald
Trump so let me ask you let me let me
just follow up with some day at general
Hayden published yesterday right well
I'll be surprised together I fear I fear
that the creator did not in doubt Trump
with the emotional intellectual or
ethical tools to carry out the
responsibilities of his office you saw
him up close he was your cousin best
served when I focused on the expertise
that I have developed in 37 years let me
finish the thought if I go this is an
example of for me I'm just very I worked
for two presidents you have never heard
me talk about either of them my view is
each of them was trying to do the job of
their best ability now you can certainly
have a difference of opinion as to the
how the why and I have my own accounts
don't get me wrong which I share with my
family and others but I am just
concerned and part of this is part of
the ethos of three of us are you know
senior retired military members and part
of that culture always said remember
when you take the uniform off
particularly as a four-star it doesn't
end and you need to be very mindful and
I'm not trying to criticize anybody else
look everybody has to do what they think
is right and I did what I hell was right
let's put the uniform back on then I
don't put you to make you uncomfortable
you testified under oath on Capitol Hill
under some pretty intense and
Republicans that you had not been given
the tools you needed to fight Russia
that you and not been given the
authorization I think I'll just read it
to you here that that you had not been
given the authorization you needed to
sort of fight fire with fire was the
sentiment I believe senator Elizabeth
Warren was part of that
did that improve did you I said I have
proved between the time you testify the
time oh you can tell over over time we
were moving what I thought was a very
positive direction how did that change
did that change come from the top
oh I'm the leadership clearly was part
of that because we're a top down in the
sense of formally directing James that
doesn't come from the bottom it comes
from the top so clearly yeah a part of
that I was glad to see that the broad
direction that that we were moving on
attended from one minute you know it's
perfect by any stretch of imagination
and you weren't alone a lot of Christa
be I director ray testified that he
hadn't been given all the authorities he
needed but did you see that as that
improved over the well yes Jo director
copy let me bring you in on something
that Bob Woodward reports that you said
and let you just say whatever you want
to say come on so he writes that I don't
believe in human sources Donald Trump
told clapper after he briefed Trump on
Russian meddling these are people human
sources who have sold their souls and
sold out their countries
I don't trust human intelligence and
these spies I don't have it here but I
believe director Brennan said something
like I won't tell the team what how do
you just to pick up on Admiral Rogers
thought how do you and and you've both a
year ago talked about this idea that it
is the job and the mission of the
intelligence community to customize the
intelligence product for the customer
who is the president of the United
States whoever he or she is but how do
you customize a product for a man who
quote doesn't believe in human sources
these are people who have sold their
souls and sold out their countries
they've done so to help our country well
in fairness this was a comment that the
president went at the time made on
exactly the six of January when I needed
to make it just to me it was all of us
at metal Mike Rogers John Brennan Jim
Comey and given the remarks he made at
Gina Haskell's installation that
- CIA recently uh it would appear to me
at least the inference you could draw is
you know he's gotten smarter about it or
gotten more educated about the value of
human but he did make a comment
something like that those were the exact
words
we didn't dwell on at the time we just
pressed on with our briefing but again
this was 20 months ago and the
president-elect at the time had very
little virtually no exposure to
intelligence at all so I think this is
in fairness to him you know it's kind of
part of the part of the education
process I have to say you know that
interesting contrast here between Mike
Hayden and and Mike Rogers here and I
think it reflects that a decision
whether or not to speak out as a as a
former is a highly personal one Mike
Rogers and I think it's quite
understandable taking it the position
he's taken he'll get over it having you
know having served in this
administration I think he's gonna come
at it from a different perspective it
was 23 years ago for me 23 years ago
this month that I retired from the
military in 1994 September 1995 I never
thought I mean it didn't ever get occur
to me be able to speak out or go on
television or any of that but I I I came
to the conclusion that we're in a very
different place and a very different
atmosphere right now so what bothered me
to start with was the characterization
of how I actually got into it with the
then president like was his
characterization of the Intel community
as the Nazis and I felt I had to speak
up on behalf they tell us committee
which I did you know I called him and
amazingly he took the call and so all my
thing was just you know just defending
and explaining the intelligence
committee by the way following a model
by general Hayden who was tremendous for
us when I was DNI in the aftermath of
Snowden because Mike could go on
television didn't have to get
interagency coordination it didn't have
to consult with lawyers and can just
explain things in a way that we couldn't
and I remembered that model so it's kind
of my turn you know to defend the
intelligence committee what bothers me
the most is the institutions and values
and norms and standards of this country
that I spent a good 50 50-plus years in
one capacity or another toiled
intransitive intelligence for every
president since John F Kennedy and when
those are under assault which they are
now I felt it was my duty my obligation
to speak up no that's not without
controversy I get a lot of I get I get
blowback from my own tribes both
military and it's and certain seniors in
the attempt you don't think it's it's
helpful but again just as well and where
I began with this and as you've seen
tonight just it's between Mike Hayden
and Mike Rogers it's a very personal
decision so let me read you a little bit
from this anonymous op-ed which came
from a senior administration official
we've all been senior administration
officials and can tell you that there
are a whole lot of senior administration
usually isn't kinds of people sitting up
here but but we don't know who this was
this up egg came out the day after Bob
Woodward's book came out and together
the two pieces created a narrative if
that suggested - I think the public that
there are serious questions about the
president's competence and and fitness
and how he carries about his job I've
seen some of your comments on TV I like
to read you a little bit and have you
expand we believe our first duty is to
this country and the president continues
to act in a manner that is detrimental
to the health of our Republic given the
instability many witness there were
early whispers within the cabinet of
invoking the 25th amendment which would
start a complex process for removing the
president but no one wanted to
precipitate a constitutional crisis so
we will do what we can to steer the
administration in the right direction
until one way or another
over that's anonymous writing in The New
York Times last week patriot or coward
that's the debate Patriots but I'm
asking ya please go ahead by the way the
only reason I'm here is Phil's here so
one man's whistleblower is another man's
smut dweller and so this is a classic
information good no matter work I mean
the New York Times well the point is a
standard the point is I think that for
those who are Trump critics this is a
courageous thing to do and to speak out
and to assure people that there are
adults in the room to use the fray the
cliche that are looking out for the best
interest of the country and are abiding
by the Constitution and not are not
driven by loyalty to an it and to an
individual and he said that there the
you know the other camp that think this
is or ledge its treasonous and disloyal
and all and all that I do think
depending on the position of this person
and I'm not convinced it's one person
but let's us say it is depending on on
the positioning of the person and their
stature it probably would have been more
compelling that they had he or she gone
public and then quickly followed by
resignation I think I do think it will
won't take as long as it took us to find
out about Mark felt but let me just
challenge that why is it if why does it
a tribal question about the president's
fitness Caesarea well that's it that's a
tribal court that's a tribal question
and people come out this is a Republican
this was in a political I don't think
well we can talk about whether
Republican the Republican Party has the
traditional identity it's always had I
don't think it does in fact what it
espouses now is upside down from what
it's always
so this is different tribal aggregation
than we traditionally ascribed really I
agree with director clapper let's be
really let's be really clear here there
is not an allegation of illegality in
that document presumably written by
someone who is not elected by the
American people it's a person's analysis
of fitness for duty the American people
get to vote for somebody who they think
is going to change the dynamic in
Washington DC and we get to say I
disagree with his judgment his
temperament and his intellect I think
this person gets one shot but at some
point if you're not elected by the
people and you make allegations that
don't involve something that crosses a
line into illegality my question would
be obviously I've said a few unkind
things minorly about the president on TV
my view would be he is not fit for duty
that is not a legal judgment and I've
not seen anything from the Special
Counsel that indicates that the
president will ever be alleged to have
conducted something illegally so I want
to know from the author if you're gonna
undermine the president maybe you get
one shot and I've said on TV that you
should get one shot but I do not believe
you had the right long term to try to
attack a president who is elected by the
people if you're alleging non fitness of
duty but you don't cross a line to say
I've seen something that violates the
law clearly and like mark felt I have to
stay because this is a violation
American Constitution I didn't see that
in the op-ed I guess if I give a comment
be leery of living in a system in which
everyone decides that which they're
going to do or not going to do I would
urge anyone stand up and speak your mind
hold yourself accountable but I just
find this guy's the power of the
structure is the values of the
institutions and as a member of one of
those institutions up until you know 90
days ago as an intelligence professional
but we have got to uphold the values and
the ethos even as others have different
views and are engaged at
and behaviors that we don't like we
don't think represent norms and we think
are working against the structure we
have got to make sure that in the face
of that we are maintaining our
professionalism our ethos our integrity
and like Phil said you didn't get
elected if you feel you can't live with
this make a case make an argument use
your rights as a citizen stand up and be
accountable for what you believe in but
don't attempt this kind of resistance
move which to me just feeds this
narrative well you can't trust the
institution's anymore I just think
that's a bad place for us to be if I
could make one comment think about what
the president University said for every
student out here who watches cable TV
watch what just happened in this
audience with a group of people who say
have a different perspective and you
used a word I can speak about this
civilly the President of the United
States had an opportunity I'm not sure I
should have a security clearance I
suspect the answer is no I'm not I've
not revealed anything to either Russians
Chinese general Hayden or anybody else
my point is the question would have been
to DNI Coates or to DNI clapper
previously if someone signs a contract
with a media organization that might
include commentary that's partisan
political shouldn't we have a standard
policy that that says that person
declines for their access to classified
information that's a fair question the
president asked I agree with with my
former supervisor in the man who
destroyed my life general ad I this is
really uncomfortable for people like me
who were told whoever the people like
you should get out and speak but when
the when I wake up on vacation the
president I had state says I'm gonna
threaten you after you say something I
don't like that to me transcends the
requirement for now intelligence offered
to stay quiet I'm gonna say no you're
not that dog don't hunt it's a bigger
issue than my responsibility to remain
loyal to the ethos the intelligence
community to say you're not going to
tell me what I can speak when I didn't
serve in the government for the past
eight years that's not gonna happen so
what was your redline I just I just want
it I want to be
you know I watched all of you on TV I'm
very familiar with your body of
criticism so you believe the president
is not stable enough to hold the nuclear
codes you believe that the president
calling the intelligence community Nazis
you spoke out on January 6 the day that
hearing and we talked about why that
might be might he be compromised by the
Russians Phil you were one of his most
effect I mean none of you were partisan
you were all extremely alarmed by his
conduct in office so so putting aside
this sort of you know he has a right to
know who's criticizing him what is it
about his conduct that created the red
lines that forced you all into the
public space starting with you general
Hayden yeah so I mean I've got deep
disagreements with policy all right
so post World War two policy frankly in
America has been based on national
consensus but on balance immigration is
a good thing it's better for America
than not second that our line system is
of national strength not not a drain on
American resources and finally that the
world's most powerful economy is
generally benefited by more free rather
than less free trade he's challenging
all those things I got a right to argue
about any every one of those all right
but in the argument right what the
president has decided to do is rather
than argue the facts of the case which
you cannot you cannot create b-roll for
me that shows the president are you in
the facts of the case right never what
he does is attack the institutions in
government who might for their own
reasons oppose this or that policy
initiative and he tried to any tries to
invalidate so so intelligence officers
are Nazis FBI is in disarray or in
tatters or or whatever it is stay
corrupt yeah the deep stage is corrupt
the interpreter there's tweet today this
morning 7:18 a.m. yeah well there was
9/11 yeah but but there know which one
you're pointing to but but there was
another one that actually said the
Justice Department under Eric Holder
would be acting just like the Justice
Department under the Attorney General
today
okay and I actually responded to the
tweet
I said bingo I mean yeah that's exactly
right he meant that as a condemnation of
today's Justice Department so the choice
we have all right is number one and
here's yes what was the crossover point
the crossover point for me was is my
continued silence or is gonna come out
wrong
over respect for the office and in other
words I would be so differential is it
creating the assumption on the part of
the others that that's acceptable or
normal or an okay attitude to have and
that that is really the argument I had
with myself
Nicole am i normalizing by my silence
something that we should not consider to
be normal
knowing full well everything Mike just
said it's absolutely correct because
when we go out and just our being here
is it at a minimum non-traditional and
for a bunch of elders in our tribe Jim
it's it's downright norm busting for us
to be here and so we know we we are
creating second and third order effects
that are harmful to the institutions
from what we have come but I've made the
calculation that silence is no longer
acceptable now each of us in our own way
choose our own formula with regard to
how we are we criticize and and and and
by the way John Brennan would be here
tonight if he hadn't been in Korea and
and John has been the most forward
leaning and I think calling it
personalizing the attacks on the
president but we all enjoy some flavor
of that and at one time or another so we
you know there are certain choices to be
made along the scale but but I think
those of us who have criticized have
made the choice we're willing to accept
the risk to institutional norms and
values in order to do something we get
back to my earlier metaphor in emergency
break glass
are you breaking the glass yeah no our
tribe yeah the fact that three of us are
under contract to CNN is in itself an
offense to MSNBC okay we're good we all
benefit from your no seriously I mean
Jim and I were out in in Reston two or
three weeks ago with with the tribal
owners and having a conversation of this
is a retired very senior retired
community and let me just say there were
there were a range of views I mean some
were very supportive but there were
there were others here who just thought
we should not be there at all and that's
not an illegitimate point of view I
don't stop mine it's not illegitimate
Jim I mean you were in the room no I I'm
with you that's exactly as usual very
articulate portrayal of the of the
debate the issue the controversy and
where and where you come down on it is a
very personal thing what is your degree
of alarm about Russia and about the
ongoing sort of practice of the
president downplaying their role there's
the Helsinki moment I think you all
spoke out publicly around that with your
alarm but the thread for you runs
through what you knew and we're involved
in in government you briefed the
President on on the sex you were there
too I'm all writers I mean the the
Russia thread has not improved I'm glad
to hear that we're doing more than maybe
on February 27th but but that is not an
impulse that's been checked he stood in
Helsinki next to Vladimir Putin and
accepted his version of events well I
call this is a great opportunity for me
to plug my book the car I mean it was
one of the one of the principal
motivations for which I wasn't gone
writing a book was my alarm about what
the about the Russians and what I saw
them doing in the run-up to our election
of 2016 you know fifty five or whatever
it's been years in Intel and I've seen a
lot of bad stuff in my time but nothing
that disturbed me more
surely when I came to comprehend
understand the scope and magnitude and
aggressiveness of what the Russians did
to our election of course I went so far
my book to say because of the magnitude
aggressiveness and the multi-dimensional
nature what they did I think they
actually influenced the outcome the
election and the Russians are still at
it they are committed to undermining our
system and one of the things that really
disturbs me is for whatever reason I
don't know what it is but the
president's failure to dime out Putin
and dime out the Russians for what
they're doing and that's that is
important because we can do a lot of
things you know components in the
government can do a lot of things but
without the sense of urgency
that's impelled by the president's
leadership and galvanizing not just the
government but galvanizing society
against the profound threat posed by the
Russians and that's what disturbs me
about this president it's why I wrote my
book
i'ma Rogers can you either tell us if
you agree that he's refused to dine out
Putin is that a fair assessment and do
you have any explanation well I'm not
gonna speak for anyone else and give you
my experience so I continued for 18
months after we finished the Intel
community assessment on this topic and
continued to discuss with him and others
about what we were seeing you know he
would often say to me Mike you know I'm
in a different place and I said mr.
president I understand that but that's
you pay me you know I am paid by the
citizens the nation to tell you what we
think sir this isn't about politics it's
not about parties this is about a
foreign state that is attempting to
subvert the very tenants of our
structure that is trying to undermine us
that should concern us as citizens that
should concern us as leaders and if we
don't do something they're not going to
stop that didn't the first time this
occurred wasn't 2016 we just saw it
taken to a whole new level a whole new
set of technologies and capabilities
merged with some pretty traditional
kinds of things that had an almost
exponential impact in some ways at least
in terms of the
of the kinds of activity I do believe
Hey look there is value in having a
relations with the Russians there's lots
of areas where we have common Ally I
believe that but at the same time I also
say but we can't have the relationship
we want if they're going to continue
with this fundamentally undermining
activity that is unacceptable and we
need to be very direct with them that
that is unacceptable and we should be
sending that message from the top to the
bottom of the structure so that they're
hearing it from all of us you said he
was in a different place where was he
that was a phrase that he would use I'm
at a different place Mike than you are
but we did I mean I'm not being
facetious I mean was he was it
ideological I mean he wanted to do some
geopolitical realignment and blow hazard
a guess my cannons you know he's more
current than I but I think they're
actually ran into it at Trump Tower in
January 17 was this evidence of the
Russian Russians undermining us cast
doubt on the legitimacy of his election
he just can't
they couldn't then and he can't now
except that I think that's fundamentally
what what is what this space he's in so
then with that as a leading how
important is the Muller investigation
well it's important because of the cloud
that's over this country and over the
presidency to resolve some issues among
which one of which is collusion or not
that I think only the Moller
investigation has there's any prospect
of the resolving at issue and that at
some point that investigation has to end
and there has to be some believe some
transparency for the American people
about the truth so how important is the
molar investigation I think it's a
critical test for whether America says
that we can have independent
investigations of individuals regardless
of where they are in society I don't
think it's going to lead to charges that
indicate that the president was involved
in something that
Arius related to the russians i don't
know about whether that involves people
on his staff what I worry about is not
whether the investigations going to show
that somehow there was some sort of
Hollywood undermining of the American
electoral process what I worry is
twofold one is someone who served at the
FBI and the Department of Justice this
is a an appropriately predicated case
what I mean is it's fine given what I've
seen for the for the Department of
Justice to investigate this it's the
same thing they would do with somebody
like me did you win were you involved in
massive financial fraud that should be
investigated the same thing that Paul
Manafort should be investigated for so
I'm afraid if there aren't Russia
charges there's going to be a political
process to say the whole investigation
is inappropriate and I'd say it's the
same thing we do with all of you if we
saw that kind of financial fraud you
defrauded the US government out of
millions of dollars is that in
substantial and the final thing I'd say
my bigger concern is if if the
investigation gets closer to the White
House or even if it stops now if the
president steps in and says I'm going to
sidestep this process to to remove
what's the term I'm looking forward to
for my son-in-law or my son or for Paul
manna for two it to pardon that but I
think that will be incredibly corrosive
in terms of a conversation with the
Congress and also in terms of how the
American people look at something that
they pere have historically looked at it
very positive that is is justice
impartial in this country is the FBI a
good place I think that's the real
question here that the president is
leading the American people to believe
that institutions of state are corrupt
this I don't care about what he did was
stormy Daniels this stuff about
institutions of state is really
corrosive and that's what I worry about
George Airy you all worked alongside Bob
Miller I got to know Bob Miller after
9/11 he was george w bush's FBI director
and he would be coming out with director
tenant when the press officers would go
in so george w bush used to say i get
the scary news and then the bad news
in the press but I want to know what you
think all of you having known knowing
the man personally what you make of the
ferocity of Donald Trump's efforts to
malign the character of Robert Miller so
I'll begin with my view of the character
of robert muller if I had a choice among
330 million Americans as to who I wanted
to entrust what Phil I think correctly
described as the future of confidence in
American democracy it'd be balm or all
right honest thorough professional
talented all right
and so he's he's continuing the course
of the investigation when this began
when I was at you know perhaps even with
you on air a year and a half two years
ago a year and a half ago I said I think
it would be over by the summer of
eighteen
and and that it would end up in a
national Rorschach test that it would be
a bit of a cloud and those who wanted to
believe X would say you see and those
who wanted to believe why I would say
you see it's going on longer right I
think it's expanded I think it's gotten
deeper I think it has multiple threads
and I frankly with no knowledge no no
data I think there's more there there
than I thought there was six 12 or 18
months on the collusion question and the
obstruction question um a variety of
questions I think Phil's instincts are
mine that not the president per se but
but the broader staff is gonna have a
lot of tough questions to answer to I
think the last indictment of the 13
Russians from the GRU was establishing
the predicate for a criminal act which
then will see whether or not we connect
any Americans to the criminal right and
so as that is preceded again my instinct
no data alright my instinct is the
President as has acted more and more
desperate more and more frightened by
the prospect of the investigation
continuing and so he is doubled down on
attacks on the on the person of Bob
Muller and on the institution's
that mower represents or is guiding and
whatever you you think the sum total of
what he's done is for his transient
personal or political needs well judge
how legitimate they are or not that's
that's actually not critical for his
transient personal or political needs he
is willing to embrace long term
destructive action against critical
institutions of American society
i'ma Rogers you were asked in March of
2017 by the president it's been reported
as such he'll let me know if it's wrong
to publicly deny you and DNI coats
arrest to publicly deny that there was
any evidence of collusion he refused to
do so saying it was inappropriate I was
never asked that so that was an
incorrect for us you were never I never
asked that I am NOT gonna correct if I
spend my time trying to correct media
reporting I'd never get anything done so
so this has been this has been reported
and has stood incorrect until tonight
but it was also reported that according
to Washington Post Trump's conversation
with Rogers was documented
contemporaneously in an internal memo
written by senior NSA official no
comment it's a no comment but not not
saying that that's I would go but no
comment
do you think that Robert Muller's
mission is Noble I think he's fulfilling
an important mission for us as a nation
I again I'd like to think it shows that
we are a system a nation of laws and
processes and structure that are
designed to ensure an independent
assessment at times I look at it go
that's a good thing for the nation as a
whole I have no clue what they will or
will not find no clue but everybody's
got opinions I hear lots of opinions but
I'm thinking I think the only person who
really knows are those who are involved
let's let the process go through and
let's see what comes out of it you've
testified under oath though that you
were worried that we were not doing you
were asked you said your concern is I
believe that President Putin has come to
the conclusion there's little price to
pay here like we're talking about it is
cyber activity right right and that was
his method one of his method
for meddling in our democracy one of the
tools that he used and and used you are
we went on to say clearly what we done
hasn't been enough was it your sense
that his efforts are ongoing I've lost
it so you your testimony was that that
you're aware of my testimony just tell
me in English what you well I mean you
testified to the fact that Putin didn't
believe that there was a price to pay
for ongoing meddling in our democracy
that seems to be an area that may
overlap with Robert Miller's
investigation of Russian I don't know if
it does or not I'm not getting I'll have
a clue what specifically he's looking at
but is getting to the bottom of Russian
meddling and whether or not it's ongoing
is that an urgent American well that's a
positive for us as a nation we need to
understand this we need to be very
public about it and we need to
articulate exactly what happened because
without that we will be sub optimized
for dealing with in the future
and the important thing to me is you
know as much as important as the
discussion is that about did they or
didn't they the most important thing to
me is so what are we going to do to make
sure this doesn't happen again that's
where we need to focus what's the answer
what are we gonna do a whole host of
things there are some improvements there
are some things ongoing but among the
most important is to make sure the
Russians understand this is unacceptable
and we're just not gonna tolerate this
do they hear that message this is
unacceptable we're not going to tolerate
this from the American president
III don't know I'm not party to his
direct conversations clearly though at
times he has chosen not to use public
forms at ties when he's been right there
with him he could have chosen he opted
not to again you heard me say we need to
synchronize the message from the
senior-most to the jr most and we need
to make sure we are very consistent we
need to be very direct believe so so
you're saying it's not true that the
president asked you to convey that he
was he did not could there was evidence
they could never had a discussion with
collusion with the president the United
States how about with his chief of staff
Ryan supreme I've never had a discussion
of collusion I have never been directed
to do anything coerced any any time I
had a discussion I felt I was able to
say hey here's my view on that
very comfortable if you were asked to
share that information with Robert
Miller would you or have you if I was
asked by robert muller and of course i
have a gas station of course I would do
you understand sort of the freak out
that people that don't know everything
you know about national security had
after Helsinki I mean you understand why
people thought I mean do you we talked
before about how you were in rural
Pennsylvania and they don't have the
concerns we have in Washington do you
understand that I said that word is in
Hawaii you know that's a conversation we
had after my mom and dad aren't either
but I miss ASEA do you understand sort
of the degree of alarm people have when
an American president takes the word of
Lattimore putin over the collective
assessment it I thought there was an
opportunity there that I wish we had
taken advantage of I thought there was
an opportunity here that we could have
taken advantage of no the he opted to go
a different direction that certainly his
right as the president but I wish we had
taken advantage of that opportunity but
that could have sent a very powerful
message director coats DNI coat said
that he would not have advised him to
have a one-on-one meeting with Vladimir
Putin would you have I don't know it
would depend on the the the specifics
look in general I'm a proponent of
talking so again I'm not gonna get into
what-ifs different scenarios I've never
found that very fulfilling do you worry
about the thread on Russia being lost as
we walk up to within almost 60 days of a
midterm election do you worry that we
have it we've missed opportunities as
I'm a writers who's the most recent to
leave government just said well are you
speaking of specifically with respect to
the security and sanctity of our
election process and oil all of it the
entire America's remembering that you
know our voting apparatus is basically
controlled to the state and local level
and I I'm sure some some entities have
done a lot to enhance of security and
others not so much
that was certainly what we observed in
2016 and again in the absence of a sort
of
leadership from which I think can only
come from the present so I have concerns
about just the security and the sanctity
of our voting apparatus for the midterms
well in particularly and I guess I put
that question to you because you make
the distinction generated in your op-ed
that you didn't come as far as as you
did in in terms of your assessment of
the 2016 results you believe that the
2016 outcome was impacted by the
Russians or sometimes they're so we're
heading into a midterms has enough
change since that election I don't know
I'm not in the position any longer to to
assess that I'm you know been out of
government halfway 20 months and but my
I would surmise from what I read that it
is uneven I'll put it that way
i'ma Rodgers is it your sense that
America is doing more or less under
President Trump than they did under
President Obama to protect our
democratic I'm not gonna compare two
presidents that is not their policy if
the NSA doing more or less I'm not gonna
compare the policies of two presidents I
served is the NSA doing enough to
preserve and protect and vouch for the
sanctity of our comfortable with the
mission execution under while I was
there yes when you'd vote for the
sanctity of the result in 60 days
Wow it's for our I mean you do you think
that we are sufficiently fortified
against the Russian meddling in the
upcoming election again it depends on
the specifics the positive side is a
recognition of the problem part of it
also highlights one of the challenges of
our current structure versus technology
what do I mean by that in the u.s.
structure elections are processes that
are all done at a state local level and
they then generate in some cases
national outcomes presidency for example
one of the challenges all I thought was
so you tell me how you expect a county a
state to withstand the focused effort of
a nation state that is a tough challenge
and so one of the you know I thought one
of the things that and I was a part of
it I tried to work on something I still
feel strongly about
we have got to figure out how we can
come to much more integrated approaches
to how we're working these problem sets
and this is where to me at times our
structure our processes are not always
optimized for the digital world that
we're living in now and you watch the
Russians for example take advantage of
that as part of their strategy and we
need to try to fill in those scenes but
it's all about either bringing together
integrated solutions to problems it
isn't just take government stop this
from happening that isn't going to be
enough political in part now I'm not
gonna argue it's just the one but
there's a definite structural piece to
this as well that we need to be paying
attention to Joe Hayden can you give me
your assessment of where you think we
are policy wise as a country heading
into the first election since the one
that is the 2016 election is still under
investigation by robert muller by others
that are that are looking at and trying
to improve our defenses against russian
meddling and we still have a president
who often lumps fat people in basements
and the Chinese into his suspect list
for meddling so so let me answer the
question you asked Mike and he felt
uncomfortable answering because I've
been out of government 10 years I think
I still have my pension so I actually
think we are better defended under the
Trump administration than we were under
the Obama administration and it's simply
because of a natural progression of the
institutions of American government NSA
CIA director of National Intelligence
you know standing on the shoulders of
their predecessors take taking lessons
learned taking what it is we've
experienced I mean Jim on vite you're
coming on this but but you said this was
an unprecedented attack and as it
evolved in front of you you were very
very impressed by it but it evolved in
front of you and your knowledge about it
developed and and then the policy guys
were lagging even further behind the
Intel guys in appreciating what it was
you were telling them we're beyond that
now we know that and so much exactly
right I think it does point out
something about miss evan
misapprehension or
intelligence that all revelation occurs
in one day and that wasn't the case at
all I mean this is something that
because I you know an FAQ I get
frequently asked question when did you
know we was the exact instant when that
light bulb went on and you knew this was
different than anything Russia has ever
done before well it wasn't any grand
revelation when the light bulb suddenly
went on because it's something that
evolved particularly the spring summer
and fall of 16 and as we gathered more
information got more insight understood
better the magnitude of what they were
doing so I think to my point is exactly
right the system is going to build on
that on that knowledge that we built
when we left
in fact that was exactly the reason why
President Obama ordered up the
intelligence community assessment
because he wanted everything we had at
the time to be put together in one
document in several versions various
various degrees of classification one of
which which he specifically directed was
that there be an unclassified version to
do as much as we could educate the
public so we left a baseline of
knowledge with the public about what the
Russians had done so I think Mike's
exactly right undoubtedly the the
institution's the community department
homeland security particularly has as
I'm sure built on them and so what
you've got are the institutions of
government I got it and and everybody is
doing far more than they did in the
summer of 2016 because you know we're
learning institutions right I think
we're doing less than we need to do
because without superseding
extraordinary presidential intervention
saying we've got to go play different
everybody's doing what they're doing but
they're playing position so this NSA is
playing in the NSA Lane more robustly
CIA CIA Lane more robustly but a little
bit like 9/11 it's a bad day to bring up
the analogy and I know it falls apart
very quickly and destructive power but
after 9/11 President Bush in
since intervene and said we're gonna go
do things really differently now a lot
of those are controversial we'll
probably have that in the later session
all right but one of them is connect me
to an office connecting the dots right
they think we're gonna we're gonna we're
gonna restructure how we do things
because we just got an attack from an
unexpected direction against a
previously unappreciated weakness until
we are better off but we're not as well
off as we should be because I don't
think we've done extraordinary I want to
make a point tee up something Phil and I
have talked about in the green room you
asked the question about manipulating
the election I don't think that's the
big issue I think that's I think we can
defend against that it's manipulating
our heads all right and and the Russians
have been magnificent and at that
building on inherent American division
so you you talked about this one yeah I
was just gonna say I think we're missing
the story here and this is where I don't
think this is an intelligence story this
is a political and leadership story
related the White House and the Congress
and that is if you look at what the
Russians have done we keep talking about
protecting the American electoral
process this is a revolutionary leader
in Russia that wants to reestablish the
empire he's about sowing discord and a
profound level in our society you're
talking about an T for black lives
matter Charlotte he is trying if you
look at their activities at a sort of
mid-tier level if you will to disrupt
elections at the macro level he's trying
to create a civil war in this country
that's where I think the White House
needs to interject and not only not put
fuel on the fire say look we are an
American people who want to be a city on
a hill we have to get over discord and
talk about things like how do we get
beyond Charlottesville and how do we get
beyond racial divides in this country
that involve having a kid a black kid
shot in a white neighborhood by white
cop that's what the Russians are trying
to do and it is profound how do we do
that with the president wakes up on 9/11
and attacks the FBI I mean one of the
questions is and it's a question I've
raised repeatedly on TV is you have
congressional leadership they don't have
to attack the president although that's
that's a debatable question from people
things like from people like Speaker why
I do think there has to be a
conversation that's
how do we bring people together instead
of encouraging people to demonstrate
against somebody else in Charlottesville
Virginia and saying that a white
supremacist equates with a black
activist you can't do that and the
Russians are building up I'm gonna get
personal I have a website it's a third
tier low budget website if the
information the emails I get from across
America that our threats are any
indication of what's going on in this
country and the volume is such that I
think they are we are in trouble not
from disrupting the American electoral
process but from people in cities across
this country hating each other that's
that what the Russians are trying to go
after
I think the subtext is electoral discord
the overall our overarching messages we
want America to be so consumed with
civil discord that they don't care about
what we do in Ukraine what do people in
the press including your your peers here
get wrong in their analysis and in my
case reporting on this president I don't
know to be honest I have been like again
I literally have spent a hundred days
trying to focus on my family and getting
some sleep
is there anything out there about me but
he has a reputation for not being a
voracious consumer of his PDB he has a
reputation for not being curious about
foreign policy are there narratives out
there that any that you're aware of that
people get wrong you you're coming fresh
out of serving him in a very senior role
in a national security just say he
approaches this job in having worked for
two presidents he approaches his job in
a fundamentally different way having
come from a totally different background
and the system is finding it a challenge
to try to understand some of the
implications of that so what is most
effective with him versus others they're
a very normal kind of thing it's as much
to me the system trying to understand
him as it's him trying to understand the
system and as a leader I would sit down
with my team and say okay so here's what
we need to be to be effective here's
what I think helps provide the insights
that help generate better policy general
operations better
general operational decisions and we got
to realize different individual
different structure different background
he's gonna approach things very
differently but as I look at this at
times I go boy the system's just finds
this really challenging now certainly as
we've said the thing that concerns me
the most is our institutions are under
attack which I always thought was that's
the strength of our system it's the fact
that we can count on these institutions
their ethos their professionalism their
commitment to the rule of law over time
regardless of the broader context that's
ongoing that has been a real strength
for us as a nation and man I just do not
want to lose that because there's huge
implications for us if you can't trust
the institutions that execute the day to
day mechanisms of governance for our
citizens that puts us in a really bad
place but they're under attack in part
by the president now I we're seeing to
me is there's a broad it's a interesting
dynamic we find ourself in right now
it's not just about one individual in
some ways you know it's somewhat
symptomatic to me of a broader kind of
dialogue that's ongoing it again you
mention it I literally have spent 100
days totally outside of DC in some cases
places I had no Wi-Fi access body cell
phone didn't watch cable television and
it's interesting to me one of my
takeaways was I just thought wow you
know is that is the dialogue I'm hearing
in some of the rural areas I found
myself for the hundred days different
than the world I've just spent it's not
good or bad it was just fundamentally
dancers yes in many ways I just thought
you know why part of me was asking
myself why is it like this what why is
this this big disconnect I mean for
example the op-ed piece I didn't once
have a discussion with anybody hey Mike
you know they all know what my job was
I've known him for years family friends
others in the couple small towns where
we were they've known me for years but
they nobody asked me on the other hand
ibid back in DC for 48 hours and I
haven't done an interaction where this
didn't come up you think it is what are
you I'm just like it just strikes me as
a little bizarre to turn the question
around to protect those institutions
what would be helpful I mean would it be
understanding that they are the thing on
the line between where we are now and
things getting better or worse and would
it be helpful if the president stopped
attacking the Intelligence Committee
always told that the teams I was
responsible for it guys let's focus on
the things we control let's make sure
that we are maintaining the ethos and
professionalism and the expectation of
the citizens of this nation I'm not
gonna spend my time worried about things
I can't control let's focus on what we
can control then as a senior you know I
would try to argue
look here's broadly the things I think
we need to do to keep to keep moving
forward and one of the things I think we
need to do is ask ourselves so what do
we get how can we strengthen these
institutions how can we make sure that
they're viewed as part of the solution
and not part of the problem because if
they're viewed as part of the problem
guys this is our structure if we don't
believe in the structures ability to
generate the outcomes we want we are
really in our locker because we don't
have much of another alternative this is
the structure that the founding fathers
created this is what we have done over
time this has helped to generate some
great things for our nation it is not
perfect and the men and women who are
part of it are not perfect but in my
experience they want to do the right
things for the right reasons and they
focus on trying to serve the citizens of
the nation to the best of their ability
even as they acknowledge they are
imperfect individuals that's the part I
want to see how do we keep them moving
forward you and general mattis and
general Kelly and a handful of others
are often described by people outside of
government who some of us don't even
know you but we project on to you this
faith that you are the guardrails
against a reckless and unstable
president I don't know that I'm a
secretary of defense or how do you how
do you feel about
that analysis and that I mean it comes
from a place of fear and desperation
that we want to believe people like you
and general mattis and others are
guardrails on this president how do you
feel about that I never felt I never
felt that was a guardrail I always
thought Mike always focus on doing the
right thing for the right reasons the
right way and as long as you do that and
you you're part of an ethos and the
teams that you lead for me you know the
largest intelligence organization in the
U of F government one of the ten senior
operational commands in the DoD as long
as you focus on that as long as the
team's focus on that as long as we focus
on outcomes and doing the right thing
the right way hey we're gonna be good
okay I think that's probably mo Matic of
the IC in general I mean if you're an
embassy X doing your thing you're just
focusing on your job your mission and
there were big parts need tells me you
aren't affected at all by any of this
you know Beltway fervor that we that
Mike didn't run into in Pennsylvania I
think you know I have great faith and
trust and confidence and the great men
woman you tell us beauty because I think
in the end they're gonna do the right
thing and they're gonna tee up they're
gonna tell truth to power whether the
power list of the truth or not general
Hayden does the ethos that Anna Rogers
described extend to this White House in
your estimation well did the
professionals in the White House
I mean I've written about this we've got
a president who is instinctive rather
than thoughtful prone to action frankly
I think he has far more confidence in
his instincts when it does in data
presented to him he he gives confidence
to a particular conclusion more often
based on who told him rather than the
evidentiary stack that's underneath that
particular conclusion and then the
problem that presents for all of us is
the institution we represent operates on
the polar opposites of what I just
described for you very evidence-based
fact-based analytical experimental
pragmatic and we have a president and
this is not a I'm trying to use
non-judgmental words here who who would
just
negative intuitive almost pretty
naturally confident in his own a priori
knowledge of all the world works and so
Mike talked about we adjust all
presidents and we do all right this is
just a this is a much bigger jump than
it's ever been within my within my
memory but our responsibility I think
this Jim said is try to adapt tell the
truth to power and do it in a way that
gets inside the head of the first
customer and that does require look I
had to adjust with President Bush and I
had a President Obama's say hey chief
for three weeks he's different and I had
to adjust how it was I talked to
President Obama we have to adjust to
President Trump but again the default
viewer is massive past president and so
your specific question was how the
president affects that yeah the
president makes it harder for the
institutions to do these jobs all
president no president wants unwelcome
news right I think this president is
more unwelcoming with regard to
unwelcome news than any president in
memory which then causes us not to
abandon our oath of office but to delay
going in there with information he would
otherwise get because you know it's not
going to work until you've built up a
stack of evidence that is almost
unarguable and so what happens is the
information you can give to a president
and a time that isn't is in time for the
president to take responsive action is
reduced and so I argue that the
president's approach to this president's
words about intelligence the president's
attitudes about intelligence is
destructive for the purposes of the
president yet to the presidency not not
just a tart tradecraft
let me press you on that a little bit
and I want to hear your thoughts on this
to fill I mean let's be a little more
blunt than that it's not just that you
stare at a stack of evidence-based
documents and you don't want to hear it
because you don't like it he watches Fox
and
friends I mean there's such a delta
between the sources that he trusts and
the sources that are truthful yeah yeah
okay I think I'll work here is done let
me tell you how I try to describe it in
a more neutral way all right all right
objective reality is why not I don't
work yeah objective reality is not the
instinctive departure point for the
president deciding what he does or say
what he does or says it just it just
isn't all right what does that do to the
truth well I mean that's that's the
whole issue isn't it we and and someone
else mentioned I think may have been Jim
the president the president's a product
not cause all right the president is an
expression of a drift towards a post
truth world in American society where as
a society we are former willing to make
decisions based upon emotion or or
preference or tribe or loyalty or
grievance rather than data fact or
evidence that's a broad spread
expression and the brilliance of the
president was that he recognized that
during the campaign and appealed to that
form of reasoning now is that brilliant
or it is tactically brilliant and it is
a rejection of the ethos of the
Enlightenment that has governed the the
Western approach to decision making
since the 17th century fill bring us
back to 2018 please you know let's leave
the 17th century and all this neutral it
let's be blunt I think people I think
something else Trump assured in is an
appetite for bluntness and I think the
blunt assessment that a lot of people
have Democrats and Republicans is that
trunk doesn't like the truth because the
truth doesn't depict him in a
particularly good light whether it's I
mean his first fight was at the
intelligence community but by far he
spent the most amount of time attacking
the FBI and the Justice Department what
are they up to well they're
investigating his campaign
and his White House staff and him for
post possibly obstructing justice
so what do you make of his rejection of
evidence-based disciplines like science
like intelligence like law enforcement
like journalism I think it puts a
tremendous premium on leadership in a
few key places Department of Defense
that's mattis Secretary of State Pompeo
CI director Gina Haspel who I know you
know she's terrific and you have the
Attorney General regardless of your
political views he stood up to the
President on the sanctity of federal
investigations this this sort of sounds
like a civics lesson but as someone who
served below the level the other three
gentlemen on this group if you're in
this kind of circumstance leadership
means two things at a premium number one
let me take let me give an example Iran
if I'm working for general Hayden the
president is a million miles away boss
what are we doing I know the president I
might have different perspectives on
whether he has on his temperament a
judgment you're focused on what you're a
leadership whether it's the NSA
leadership Secretary of Defense tells
you to do I think the national security
leadership right now is pretty strong
and and people in this room and
elsewhere ought to be watching when they
change because there is a lot of
pressure on them to bring sanity to
those departments that may be whether
it's Obama or bush or Clinton or Bush
maybe you wouldn't have that kind of
pressure on us the second thing I'd say
is people like me and those jobs are
looking at the boss CIA director
Secretary of Defense's saying I have
trust in you on Iran North Korea for
whatever the president decides to say on
Twitter to walk in the room and say
there's a stack of evidence about
whether North Korea is doing anything on
nukes or strategic weapon strategic
missiles and here's what the evidence
says and if you want to not that you
would say this but if you want to meet
fire me fine so the the pressure on
cabinet officials and people like the
CIA director to manage the work force
and say here's what we're doing and to
say I will present the truth to the boss
I think is really at a premium no he
said no the man of the people
okay let me take one from the overflow
room hi overflow room all right okay I'm
a Rogers you noted that 2016 was not the
first time the Russian has tried to
impact American elections when was well
I guess when did that happen before and
what did we do to respond to it I mean
we've seen the Russians and Jim and Mike
feel free to chime in boy we've watched
the Russians for decades engage in this
kind of behavior in terms of attempting
to undermine the institutions of our
nation with the thing that was different
in 2016 to me was they just combined
technologies with some very traditional
tradecraft that so really ratcheted up
and and it had a breadth of impact that
I just don't think that we had seen
before it's such a massive level can I
just play if we were to do what the
Russians did we would call covert
influence and I'd be the last one on
stage saying we never done that all
right but but as a practitioner covert
influence never creates a fracture in a
society covert influence succeeds when
it identifies pre-existing fractures and
then exploits them and so the additional
factor in addition to technology is the
fact that we are a far more inviting far
weaker target in 2016 than we were in 84
88 92 96 well the big difference I mean
we have records going back to at least
the 60s where the Russians made some
attempt to interfere and every virtually
every presidential election but the big
difference as Mike indicated technology
specifically the mass of an aggressive
use of social media let me do one more
up in the overflow room and then I'll
get to you it's a microphone let me take
this to you Phil what advice do you have
for current intelligence professionals
who feel hopeless knowing their work
will be disregarded by their ultimate
customer or the president I don't
understand the question why would it be
disregarded if you look at the national
security issues we face today whether
it's sort of what's going on with unrest
in Latin America whether it's whether
Iran is or is not complying with the
nuclear
whether it's what reconstitution or
construction of nuclear and ballistic
missile programs in North Korea why
would you set back and say that my work
is not valuable as a customer it goes
back a little bit to what I said before
your leadership gina Haspel at CIA I
guarantee you is sitting there saying I
don't care what the president says
whether it's Bush Obama or or Trump I
want to know exactly what our
penetration is of the Iranian nuclear
program whether we can certify that they
are not building a nuclear weapon and
ballistic missiles that will threaten
Europe and North America yes or no so I
let me defend the question arm
I'm sure this person damn it where is it
here she is in the overflow room so he
or she is safe I'll do it you guys
taught me I will protect my sources and
methods but I'm sure that people are
worried that young people will be
discouraged from this profession because
they think that the president by getting
on Twitter and attacking the
intelligence community by comparing them
to Nazis by calling the Justice
Department broken and corrupt may be
discouraging a young person who doesn't
understand what yes I would agree with
that I would say you cannot sustain and
I did not write this question by the way
I think that's a fair perspective if you
you cannot have the president United
States calling the FBI leadership
corrupt and referring to intelligence
professionals at Nazis and then go out
on a college campus and I did recruit a
college campuses the the the brand of
the CIA regardless of your political
perspectives was awesome you go on
campus and say you're gonna take a 40
percent pay cut to call me Carrie
Mathison let's face it no this is excuse
me this is 1999 but my point is I do
think there's over the course of time
and I'm talking years you cannot have
the leadership of the executive branch
saying don't trust the executive branch
I would agree with that but I would
argue that that's going to take that
that corrosion will take years it's
gonna take this president if we have a
second president who starts to do that
my level of concern is going to jump
dramatically because I'm gonna start to
say this must reflect what American
culture thinks about the institutions of
government not what weren't president
thinks about
it seems important anyone else want to
jump in on this yeah I would I would
tell that young intelligence
professional remember the criterion for
us should not be does the customer
always agree with us I have had plenty
of times as a military intelligence
professional where operational
commanders I worked for said Mike I
don't see it that way or like I'm not
sure hey if you could get me more in the
following you might convince me what I
always tried to tell the teams that I
was a part of you got to be prepared to
live in a world and what some of our
customers are gonna have different views
you know it is worth remembering basics
sometimes you know the oath of office
that everybody takes I solemnly swear
that I will support defend the
Constitution of the United States of
America against all enemies foreign and
domestic and that I will bear true faith
and allegiance to the same meaning the
Constitution and I think that that
thought that which is you know part of
our history and a lot is important to
remind people I I've done a lot of
college the universities last a couple
years and I find a lot of still a lot of
interest in public service in national
security and in the intelligence
community yet today is that can I bet
you if you look and I'm I'm almost sure
that if you look at the statistics on
applications they probably haven't gone
down very much this is like a four chair
turn on the voice go ahead this person
in the overflow room with everybody Jim
Jim's ethos we can't stand this over
multiple administration's and Mike I've
had commanders this I don't agree with
you the distinction here and I've
written about this and it's based on my
conversation with PDB briefers all right
that we've we've had presidents who
disagree with us and we've argued about
the facts we've had presidents who've
disregarded our facts in line we've
never had a president for whom the facts
are not the departure point for his
reasoning or decision-making and I don't
mean that to be judgmental I just mean
that be descriptive that is a fairly
accurate description of of this
president and that makes it very hard
for them for the fact-based guys
to influence doesn't change the ethos
doesn't change the oath doesn't doesn't
change our responsibility but that
interface between our gears spinning and
the big gear in the Oval Office
sometimes the teeth don't don't mesh and
I think we're gonna have to end it there
we could go all night and you all would
probably love if we went all night but
we we we do have to let our folks free
here thank you all for being a wonderful
audience of patient audience we didn't
get to as many questions and answers as
we hope there there is a reception
following you will get opportunities to
chat with some of these individuals some
may have to leave sooner than others but
what I would ask everybody do is if
everybody could just stay in their seats
for just a moment or two longer so we
can let the guests on the stage and the
first row or two of folks here our
distinguished visitors to get out of the
room and into the reception so that we
can get a drink over your corner and
with that thank you
