Chapter 13: The Stripper 
youtube.com/watch?v=lYYFJc-S6qE

priscilla gaily knew her audience they were mostly
businessmen who would slip into Joanna's
18/19 Club on M Street in the heart of
downtown Washington to ogle the
strippers gaily sometimes began her act
dressed as a secretary with a briefcase
in glasses in the dark of Joanna's the
customers could anonymously watch
priscilla Sue take it all off the
strippers knew how to feed the fantasies
of the patrons they all pictured their
secretaries coming into the office that
way
gaily said a couple of the men told me
that but mostly its ego building we come
and sit and talk to them hug them maybe
this is the only place they can get away
from their wives they often come to
watch and talk to a particular girl one
day in the fall of 1990 a tall man sent
a waitress over to her with a $10 tip he
had also asked the waitress to relay a
compliment it was something like he had
never expected to find such grace and
beauty in a strip club
gaily ran after the man as he was
leaving and caught him at the door to
thank him more for his words than the
money a couple of weeks later Robert
Hanssen was back this time he gave her
his business card with the embossed gold
seal of the FBI perhaps she said since
Hansen was an FBI agent he could do her
a favor I asked him to find my father he
said he'd try he wrote down the name of
my father Gerry Roberts he got my mother
pregnant in the church parking lot and
my grandfather ran him off with a
shotgun in Marion Indiana then 32 she
had last seen her father when she was 8
gaily said he came to the house only
once and played the piano with me and he
looked at me and said she's mine then he
was gone
Hanson never found gay Lee's father but
at their next meeting he had a surprise
for her he gave her a sapphire and
and necklace too gaily it was as though
a fairy tale had come true guys who came
to strip clubs did not give the dancers
jewelry worth thousands of dollars at
least not without wanting sex in return
but she insisted Hansen never did this
was a very unusual man gaily realized
something far outside her usual
experience she had married briefly at 16
acquiring the name gaily dropped out of
high school and moved to Columbus Ohio
where she began stripping there she won
the title of stripper of the year in the
old burlesque theater in Columbus in
1980 with another stripper she moved to
Boston and danced at the golden banana
under the stage name of Tracy Starr four
years later she came to Washington at
Joanna's I could make two three four
hundred a night one night eight hundred
on tips the $800 on one night was with a
whole bunch of oriental men I think they
were Japanese I lit my nipples on fire
and they were pushing all this money at
me
it's a strippers trick you turn away
from the audience first you have to
split the matches wet them then put them
on your nipples and light the matches
and in the dark it looks like your
nipples are on fire oh the Japanese said
oh oh and all of them were pushing
hundred-dollar bills at me I'm still
laughing about it
although gaily never completed high
school she was intelligent interested in
art in life and intellectually curious
she also had a sense of humor
stripping isn't bad she said once you
get over the being naked part in his
relationship with the stripper Hanson
appeared to be living a James Bond
fantasy combined with Professor Henry
Higgins in my fair lady in the musical
based on the play Pygmalion by George
Bernard Shaw Higgins a professor of
acoustics bets he can teach a cockney
flower girl to pass for a duchess Hanson
was playing professor Higgins to
galeezal Aiza Doolittle
in the Greek legend Pygmalion fell in
love with the statue of a beautiful
woman he had sculpted the goddess
Aphrodite brought her to life Hansen
took gaily to art galleries although he
insisted on those expeditions she not
wear her high white spiked heels they
took long walks together
she said we walked to the National
Gallery to the Hirshhorn he did offer to
take me to the National Archives but I
was more interested in art than history
I like the old masters Leonardo
especially and he tried to improve her
spiritual life continually urging her to
go to church although she passed a
church every day on her way to Joanna's
I felt it was hypocritical for me to go
to church and then go to the club and
take my clothes off in April 1991 Hanson
told Gailey he was going on a trip to
Hong Kong to her amazement he asked if
she would like to go with him she said
she could not afford the trip but Hanson
asked her to walk with him to a travel
office there he picked up his airline
reservation and handed her a roundtrip
ticket to Hong Kong on an official FBI
inspection trip Hansen was not supposed
to bring a woman friend of course they
flew to Hong Kong on separate flights
and stayed at the same hotel in separate
rooms for two weeks they had breakfast
together every morning and dinner at
night once they took the ferry to
Kowloon and Hansen showed her around the
streets and shopping malls
she was baffled by what Hansen wanted I
never met any man who didn't deep down
want to screw me she said
matter-of-factly I had to find out she
had wondered she said if he was
repressed because of his family and
Church she had to know if he really
wanted sex
so in Hong Kong Gailey made her move I
had a lot of souvenirs and needed a
bigger suitcase to get them home she
said I asked him to come to my room to
see the souvenirs and see how big a
suitcase I would need he came to my room
I was very drunk she recalled she had
begun with oral sex she said but she
insisted Hansen did not consent to
intercourse he did not want it I never
dreamed that he wouldn't Hansen admired
James Bond and the movies about the
exploits of agent double-oh-seven
but he may also have fantasized that he
was Humphrey Bogart living a real-life
romantic role in Casablanca whenever
they were in a piano bar together gaily
added there was one song that Hanson
would request in Hong Kong she said he
always asked for as time goes by
Hanson never took Gailey into FBI
headquarters as far as is known but he
did take her to the bureau's training
academy in Quantico Virginia south of
Washington I saw the library the
shooting range the little town they set
up for training agents he bragged how
good a shot he was in August 1991 at
Haim alito's a Mexican restaurant in
Georgetown Hanson had some more
surprises for her first he handed her an
envelope it was an American Express card
with my name on it I never had a credit
card I thought that was wonderful
and then he handed me a pair of keys and
I knew they were nice keys because they
had the little leather holders on them
so they had to be for a nice car and I
was like what are these for and he says
this is for your new car it's a Mercedes
a champagne silver Mercedes and it's
being cleaned up and when we're through
eating we'll go pick it up and I'm like
you bought me a Mercedes I couldn't
finish eating I couldn't even eat I kept
asking questions and said do we have to
eat can't we just go afterwards they
drove out to Alexandria to get the car a
1985 mercedes-benz 190e sedan for which
Hanson had paid the dealer ten thousand
five hundred dollars in cash Gail II
could not believe it she drove 50 miles
out of her way when she went back to her
apartment in Silver Spring Maryland just
to be in the car
before Christmas they had dinner
together at a club in Maryland there was
a piano bar and once again Hanson asked
for as time goes by with the romantic
melody playing in the background
Hanson surprised gaily with an
unexpected question he asked if he
wasn't happily married would I ever be
interested in him I was totally confused
I said of course I would be gaily said
her confusion stemmed from the fact that
up to that evening Hanson had always
talked about how important his family
was it was obvious his wife and kids
were everything to him but as matters
turned out it was to be their last
dinner together the decision to go back
to Columbus that Christmas turned into a
disaster for Gailey her life went
rapidly downhill she ran up debts and
her car was wrecked in a collision with
a city truck the Mercedes was smashed
totaled in March of 92 that's the day my
life went really bad my friends were
smoking crack there was no insurance the
guy who was supposed to pay my insurance
on the car said he had smoked it he
spent the money on crack she pawned the
diamond and sapphire necklace for a
fraction of their value when the money
ran out
she used the American Express card to
buy Easter dresses for her nieces
but Hanson had told her that the credit
card for which he paid the bills was to
be used strictly for expenses for the
Mercedes or for emergencies when he saw
the dresses on the credit card statement
he flew to Columbus there was an awkward
encounter Gailey said Hanson retrieved
the card and left she became hooked on
crack and turned to prostitution to
support her habit
she was arrested in 1993 caught in a
police sting when a friend she was with
sold crack to an undercover cop her
mother called Hanson on his direct line
at the FBI to ask for help but he
refused Gailey pleaded guilty to avoid a
longer sentence and spent a year in the
State Reformatory for women in
Marysville Ohio
later she had a child out of wedlock and
fell deeper into her life on the streets
of Columbus still Hansen had helped her
more than she ever dreamed any man would
he showed me a different way of living a
whole new me she felt this way even
though their relationship had not lasted
and she had failed to better herself as
he seemed to want but had done just the
opposite
Hansen fantasized he was James Bond
professor Higgins and Humphrey Bogart or
all three but he had a much bigger
secret than his strange romance with
Priscilla sooo gaily the stripper who
admired Leonardo da Vinci
