Chapter 26: Oh, My God!
youtube.com/watch?v=U28glpXzDp8

there had been a big meeting 
at the FBI's Washington
field office to try to figure out the
voice on the tape
but it reached no conclusion afterwards
Bob King and Jim Milburn the FBI's two
veteran Soviet analysts were walking
back together to headquarters the more
he looked at the case Milburn said the
more he thought the mole worked for the
FBI not the CIA
not only that Milburn concluded from the
contents of the file that the moles
served in an FBI analytical unit not one
of the operational divisions and most of
the material in the file dealt with the
Soviets Jim suddenly wrote on a tiny
piece of paper Hanson King firmly
disagreed I said there's just no way he
has a wife and kids and he's more
Catholic than the Pope Hanson just did
not fit the profile of a mole I'd met
his family and several of his children
I'd been to his house the two analysts
had come to know Hanson well when he
supervised - the mole study the three
had conducted to see if older FBI cases
might provide clues to the current
traitor Hansen did seem notably
religious the analysts knew he slipped
off to mass almost every day back at
headquarters after the short walk from
the field office King and Milburn
adjourned to their office in the vault a
v-shaped windowless storage room on the
fourth floor that had been converted to
a secure office the door could only be
opened by a digital combination lock
sensitive materials were kept in a safe
inside the vault and mold investigations
were run there it was out of the way on
an inside corridor which had the added
advantage of shielding it from the
questions of other counterintelligence
agents curious about what was going on
in the vault the two analysts talked
over what was known so far the voice on
tape was still a mystery mr. PIM did not
know his identity but had offered some
additional fragments before he brought
out the file from Moscow King said he
had already told us some things tidbits
that were in it one tidbit only added to
the puzzle when the Russians asked for
the name of someone whom they could
approach as a possible recruitment the
mole offered up the name of Jack hot
shower the name initially did not ring a
bell with either analyst who was Jack
hot shower Milburn asked King thought
back to the time that he and Milburn had
worked on the study of past efforts to
penetrate the FBI 12 years earlier for
several months in 1988 the two analysts
in their supervisor had worked on the
mole study in room 4835 a cramped
cubicle at headquarters the supervisor
was Robert Hanson Hanson had often
referred to his friend Jack from Germany
King remembered he was always talking
about Jack from Germany at some point he
must have mentioned Jack's last name
King had also seen the report that HA
showers name had been offered by the
mole as someone the KGB might try to
recruit at the time Jack hot shower was
married and living in Germany it
commanded an air infantry company in
Vietnam served with the Special Forces
in Germany for three years and then as a
military attache in the American Embassy
in Bonn he retired from the service in
1994 but none of that explained why an
obscure retired Army lieutenant colonel
had been singled out by the mole in the
course of their discussion about hot
shower and when Milburn asked who is
Jack hot shower the answer emerged King
realized now that Jack from Germany and
Jack ha shower were the same person
King remembered the electric moment when
the truth dawned on both of them in
unison we said oh my god
the two
lists had a copy of the tape in the
vault quickly they spun the dial on the
old-fashioned Mosler safe pulled out the
tape and listened to it again
recognizing the voice before had been
extremely difficult because the tape was
only 2 minutes long and the mole
whispered some of the time without any
context identifying one voice from what
might be tens of thousands was
challenging moreover on the tape the
mole spoke only 41 words along with
several grunts and uh-huhs but the last
time Milburn and King heard the tape
they had not figured out who Jack harsh
hour was it made their task of voice
recognition exponentially easier now
they knew the voice on the tape
that's Hanson King said
