Chapter 22: The Band Was Playing
youtube.com/watch?v=cA_l-47NB2Y

the KGB file was in Moscow which meant 
the CIA would have to run a high risk operation
to get it out the operational plan
called for Mr. Pim to retrieve the file
from its hiding place and pass it to the
CIA
this was no simple undertaking when the
KGB was dismantled in 1991 a month
before the collapse of the Soviet Union
its successor agency in the Russian
Federation was divided into two parts
the SVR responsible for foreign spying
and the FSB which handled internal
security and surveillance in Moscow the
FSB took over the job of the KGB's
former second chief Directorate with
heavy FSB surveillance of CIA officers
operating out of the American Embassy in
Moscow the handoff had to take place
with extreme caution
under no circumstances could either mr.
Pym or the CIA officer who met him
clandestinely be caught in the act and
the FSB had eyes everywhere espionage is
not all James Bond glamour the KGB man
had hidden the file in his mother's
garage it had been sitting in that
prosaic hiding place for five years
elaborate detailed arrangements were
made so that the file could safely be
extracted from its hiding place passed
to the CIA and sent on its way to FBI
headquarters in downtown Washington the
first task of the CIA officer designated
to meet Mr. Pim was to evade
surveillance the officer might dryclean
himself by driving around the streets of
Moscow for hours to try to throw off any
followers he might switch cars or go on
foot part of the time ducking in and out
of department stores and alleyways a
more elaborate trick the CIA sometimes
used was to have the clandestine officer
switch
places with someone in the embassy
perhaps a low-level employee even a
workman whom the FSB agents did not
ordinarily bother to follow the CIA
officer would be dressed like the other
employee and a skilled makeup artist
would change his face to closely
resemble his double the plan called for
the handoff to take place in Moscow on
August 4th 2000 if for any reason it
failed Mr. Pim and his CIA contact were
to try again
one month later on September 4th their
work done Rochford suggested it was time
to celebrate the FBI agent and Mr. Pim
had been together in New York for two
weeks it was almost the July 4th holiday
to Rochford it seemed an appropriate
date to party the file the key to his
long pursuit of the mole was almost
within his grasp for their celebration
Rochford and Mr. Pim went out on a
dinner boat on the Hudson River they
could finally relax after all the
tension it was a perfect night for a
cruise once aboard they toasted each
other I will be a very rich businessman
the Russian said and you will become a
general Mr. Pim apparently did not
realize that unlike the KGB FBI agents
do not have military rank the band was
playing loudly so none of the other
passengers on the boat could hear what
the Russian and his friend were saying
