Chapter 14: The Spy Who Played Monopoly


(Part 2 of 2)
intelligence committees and visitors
from mi6 the British Secret Intelligence
Service and mi5 the British internal
security service you travelled through
it in little carts one visitor said when
the $70,000,000 Soviet embassy complex
was completed a decade later it included
the eight story Chancery Building faced
in white marble a nine story apartment
building and eight classroom school a
playground a gymnasium an Olympic sized
swimming pool a 400-seat auditorium an
underground parking garage and a large
reception hall in Moscow the KGB had
long been engaged in its own efforts to
bug the US Embassy in the Soviet capital
as far back as 1945 the Russians
presented ambassador Averell Harriman
with a carved replica of the Great Seal
of the United States the hollow wooden
seal had decorated the wall of four u.s.
ambassadors before the listening device
it concealed was discovered by the
Embassy's electronic sweepers in the
early 1950s the bug was highly
sophisticated it had no power source but
was activated by a microwave beamed from
outside the embassy much later
construction of the new American Embassy
in Moscow was halted in 1985 when it was
discovered that the building was riddled
with literally thousands of tiny bugs
the structure had in effect been turned
into a giant radio transmitter by the
KGB the russians had delivered huge
slabs of precast concrete with the bugs
already embedded within by the time the
bugs were found 22 million dollars had
already been spent on construction to
find the tiny transmitters embedded in
the Embassy's walls had not been easy
security experts from Washington were
sent to Moscow with special x-ray
equipment they were trained rock
climbers who had to hang off the side of
the building as they went from floor to
floor in weather that was sometimes 40
degrees below zero
the discovery of the bugs caused a great
uproar in Congress there were calls to
raise the entire structure and start
over with American construction workers
after years of debate it was finally
decided to demolish the top four floors
down to the sixth floor slab any
microphones below that level would not
matter because the plans called for the
construction of four new bug-proof
stories up to the tenth floor and a
penthouse any sensitive business would
be conducted in the new part the project
was called top hat the new floors were
built by 300 American construction
workers flown in for that purpose and
special precautions were taken to make
sure that this time there were no
transmitters no outsiders were allowed
on the construction site and security
was tight but an incident took place
that was not reassuring in April 1997 an
AWOL Russian soldier somehow managed to
slip into the residence of the Acting
American ambassador and spend the night
he was discovered the next day taking a
shower meanwhile US intelligence found
that the Soviets had also built tunnels
leading into and under the new American
Embassy in Moscow the way this was
learned was not publicized satellites
told us there were tunnels under the new
embassy one former intelligence official
revealed there were air pockets the heat
varies when there are tunnels and they
were detected Robert Hansen betrayed
monopolies in 1989 the FBI's tunnel was
compromised from that time forward
because the Russians did not occupy the
embassy until 1994 they had five years
to put countermeasures in place and to
build a secure room such as the bubble
in the US Embassy in Moscow for
sensitive conversations since the
Russians were aware of the tunnel it
produced little of value to the FBI in
the 1990s the bureau realized that the
tunnel was no longer useful its time had
passed
but when senior counterintelligence
officials met to consider the fate of
the tunnel a major argument broke out
the question said one former FBI
counterintelligence agent was should we
fill it up there was this big fight over
whether to fill it full of concrete John
Lewis for one argued against it what if
it turns out to be the same old Russia
Lewis asked suppose the Cold War comes
back the tunnel he argued might yet
prove useful in the future at the time
of course neither Lewis nor his
colleagues knew that Hanson had already
betrayed the tunnel finally an agreement
was reached the tunnel was sealed up at
the townhouse end where the tunnel began
but not filled since the FBI was no
longer using the facility it expected to
sell the house of course you'd want to
seal it up a former FBI man explained
how would you like to be the new owner
living in the house sitting down to
dinner and suddenly the Russians walk in
from the basement after Hanson was
arrested in 2001 the existence of the
tunnel and his betrayal of it became
known although the details of the
project remained highly classified when
the news of the tunnel broke the
Russians filed a diplomatic protest
calling it a flagrant case of the
violation of generally recognized
standards of international law Russia's
ambassador to Washington URI vo shakhov
seemed much more laid back if we find it
he told a reporter perhaps we can use it
as a sauna
