Chapter 23: Who Is Mr. Pim
youtube.com/watch?v=dTdZkMRfgFo

when Aleksandr scherbakov arrived in the
United States in the summer of 1981 with
his wife Malvina he was not yet thirty a
very junior KGB counterintelligence
officer in the Soviet embassy in
Washington he served in the embassy for
four years until May 1985 at first
undercover with the title of third
secretary and vice consul near the end
of his tour he was upgraded to second
secretary and consul Valentin axel Yenko
a senior KGB spy in the embassy new
scherbakov and overlapped with him for
several months from August 1981 to the
following summer I knew him he said he
was in kr counterintelligence I was PR
political intelligence he was a novice
in the station he was a newcomer it was
his first foreign tour as far as I
remember he did not do any spectacular
work his wife was unusual because she
was from a national minority in Russia
he was a lean guy his voice was
penetrating and he was good in
one-on-one conversation he was very
polite showed respect to older people he
tried to keep good relations with
everyone he knew how to get along in
those days Yakub skin was still the
resident in a kind of inverse logic
scherbakov although a very junior
officer was assigned to the most
difficult targets penetration into the
CIA and FBI was next to impossible
oxygen Co said scherbakov being younger
would have CIA and FBI targets because
there were low expectations of success
the targets were the least important
according to oxygen Co the important
targets were the White House State the
Pentagon the military industrial complex
and NSA mine was the White House while
in the Washington rezidentura
scherbakov played a minor supporting
role in the John Walker case John a
Walker jr. headed a family ring of Navy
spies who sold u.s. Navy codes to the
KGB Walker had spied for the KGB for 18
years he recruited his son Michael and
brother Arthur and a close friend Jerry
a Whitworth to help him Walker was
arrested in May 1985 pleaded guilty and
was sentenced to life in prison he died
there in 2014 at age 77 on May 19th
Walker had left a 7-up can as a signal
to the Russians near Poolesville
Maryland a rural area outside of
Washington DC aleksei g-tuck chenko
walker's KGB case officer was spotted in
the area Walker left a shopping bag full
of 129 classified Navy documents on a
country road nearby hours later on May
20th 1985 the FBI arrested Walker in the
middle of the night at a motel in
Maryland a few days later on May 23rd
scherbakov and two other Soviet embassy
employees escorted tuck chenko his wife
Olga and two daughters to national
airport the talks anko's boarded a plane
to Montreal and then an Aeroflot flight
to Moscow they seemed to have left in a
hurry the FBI found a half cooked
hamburger in a frying pan on the stove
his tour over scherbakov went back to
Moscow in 1985 the same year that
half-a-dozen espionage cases including
Walker's spy ring exploded in the u.s.
back at KGB headquarters scherbakov
star rose quickly his mentor and
protector his hos yen was Victor Audrey
on/off the chief of the American
Department of Directorate K the KGB's
counterintelligence arm at headquarters
in the lexicon of the KGB
when officers in Directorate K were
assigned overseas they were said to work
in line kr or counterintelligence it was
there in the counter intelligence
Directorate at KGB headquarters that
scherbakov had intimate access to the
file of the unidentified mole inside US
intelligence but unknown to his SVR
superiors scherbakov meticulously and
secretly
copied into his personal notebook all of
the titles of the documents the mole had
provided to Moscow in his tiny
handwriting it was all there every
detail later his mentor Andriana off
became head of Directorate s which
trained illegals to be sent abroad and
he brought scherbakov with him as
scherbakov rows within the hierarchy he
became a colonel and deputy director of
the illegals Directorate he was on the
list to be promoted to general but
scherbakov had other plans
he left the SVR in 1995 removing the
rest of the file that would make him a
millionaire and headed for his mother's
garage his colleague Valentin axel Yenko
had worked as a senior officer in the
Washington residency of the KGB for six
years before he returned to Moscow in
1982 in 1993 he agreed to help yuri be
vets another former KGB agent write a
book on Chevette seized experiences in
the washington rezidentura
Chevette had been posted to washington
for two years in the mid-1980s
undercover as a toss correspondent both
men later emigrated to the United States
in the summer of 1999 scherbakov had
approached axel Yanko for his help on a
business deal scherbakov was in Moscow
and contacted us again co at his home in
the u.s. scherbakov talked
enthusiastically about exporting rugs
caviar and artifacts
they exchanged faxes but the business
arrangement they entered into did not
produce results it seemed to be how all
of scherbakov ventures ended a year
later scherbakov was lured to New York
and met bill stout to talk about
exporting artifacts then Stout vanished
and Mike Rochford appeared in his place
to the FBI scherbakov was now mr. PIM
although he was furious at first at
having been tricked
it was after several days in New York
that mr. PIM finally decided he had
something far more valuable to sell than
little wooden boxes decorated with
Russian fairy tales
