Chapter 34: SuperMax


(Part 2 of 2)
the United States Attorney General for
one year but may be renewed and extended
indefinitely
it was after 15 years Hansen was still
under a Sam the Sam meant he was cut off
almost completely from the outside world
under the provisions of the Sam Hansen
could not have contact with anyone other
than his wife members of his immediate
family his priests and his attorney I
discovered this when I attempted to send
a letter to Hansen seeking an interview
in return I received a stern letter from
the then warden Robert a hood informing
me that at the direction of the Attorney
General the special restrictions on
Hansen prohibited him from contact with
the news media because there was a
substantial risk of disclosure of
secrets that would pose a threat to the
national security of the United States
Hansen was also prohibited from
receiving mail or writing to anyone
except his family and his lawyer
Hansen's family had hoped he would be
sent to Allenwood the federal prison in
central Pennsylvania where he could be
visited more often since it is much
closer to them but the Bureau of Prisons
decided to send him instead to the grim
Supermax perhaps the government thought
he deserved an extra measure of
punishment or counterintelligence
officials worried that even locked down
alone in a maximum-security prison cell
he might somehow devise a way to slip
more secrets to the KGB
soon after Hansen arrived in the prison
in Florence Colorado bonny Hansen
accompanied by her daughter Susan and
Hansen's frail 90 year old mother Vivian
visited him no physical contact with
Hansen was permitted they spoke to him
by telephone through thick glass he
described to them the harsh conditions
in the Supermax he complained he was
developing hip trouble from sleeping on
the concrete slab this is really hard
time Hansen said at first
Hansen received visits from a Greek
Orthodox priest who provided him with
some books by CS Lewis later at Bonnie's
request a young Catholic priest was
allowed to see Hansen
most convicts are sent to the Supermax
for at least three years in the second
year some are rewarded for good behavior
by having a few restrictions removed
they may be allowed out of their cells
for group meetings in the third year
according to sins vol they can walk with
escort to the commissary the prison
store and can go to group meals but none
of that gradual easing of restrictions
in the three-year steps would be
possible for Hanson as long as the
attorney-general's sam remained in place
the only work that might be available to
Hanson in the Supermax would be a menial
prison job according to Chapman jobs are
unit orderlies sweeping mopping cleaning
scrubbing - Bonnie Hanson what her
husband did remained a deep mystery how
such a loving husband and father could
have done all this to Bonnie as she told
her family there was something so
utterly strange and tragic about the
whole thing
it was beyond her understanding but one
complaint he voiced to his family was an
indication of how after all that had
happened he had not fully grasped the
enormity of what he had done and the
cold reality of where he was I had
thought Hanson said that I might be
treated better in prison because of my
long years of service that was pure
fantasy by Hanson apparently he could
not face the fact that for almost 22 of
his 25 years in the FBI
he had intermittently betrayed the
country he had sworn to protect
when Hanson was an FBI
counterintelligence agent he might have
viewed a video of the arrest of Dmitri
Fedorovich Poliakoff top hat the first
and most valuable agent he betrayed to
the Russians the video had made its way
to the west and was even aired on CNN
it showed general Polyakov his arms
handcuffed behind his back as KGB goons
rip off his shirt fingers appear on each
side of his face forcing him to look at
the camera dignified despite all of this
top hat stares straight ahead
knowing full well that when the long
months of interrogation are over he will
be executed he never knew the name of
his betrayer
