Chapter 15: True Friends
youtube.com/watch?v=gzQ6n0AxYhA

Jack Platt a veteran CIA clandestine officer 
and Gennady vasilenko
a seasoned KGB counter spy were on
opposite sides of the Espionage battles
but they forged a remarkable friendship
that transcended the Cold War the
collapse of the Soviet Union and for the
Russian years of harsh imprisonment by
the KGB the two met in 1977 at an
unlikely venue a Harlem Globetrotters
basketball game in Washington vasilenko
was a tall broad-shouldered athletic man
who loved sports and hunting in the
Soviet embassy vasilenko x' cover job
was public relations officer he actually
worked in line KR the KGB's
counterintelligence arm vasilenko x'
tennis partner an FBI agent told him
about a friend he should meet he said he
was a guy who liked shooting and hunting
and was a real cowboy vasilenko later
recalled the cowboy was Jack Platt whose
job was to try to recruit KGB agents to
work for the CIA the crowd noise in the
arena would shield their conversation
both the CIA and the FBI of course knew
that vasilenko was a KGB officer CIA
called him glazing the FBI and the CIA
gave him a joint krypton him mono light
the two men immediately hit it off and
against all odds found that they liked
each other over the years Platt
repeatedly tried to recruit vasilenko
but the KGB man would have none of it he
laughed off and brushed aside all of
Platts repeated efforts to get him to
change sides
Jack Platt was not a typical CIA officer
although a tough-minded
ex-marine he was warm funny and affable
he was also irreverent and outspoken not
qualities that endeared him to his
bureaucratic superiors
he was a Texan born in San Antonio in
1936 and graduated from Williams College
before joining the Marines for three
years
like many ex Marines he was intensely
loyal to the Corps throughout his life
while in the Marines in 1959 he married
Paige Gordon and they reared three
daughters in 1963 he joined the CIA
which sent him to Vienna in 1966 for
five years the Austrian capital the
setting for Graham Greene's cold war
classic the third man was a favorite
hunting ground for spies it was pretty
much a free-for-all
Platt recalled with the Russians and
other intelligence services all
headquartered there after service in
Laos he was sent to Paris in 1975 after
two years he was back in Washington
during those years and later he was a
Soviet targets officer meaning his
principal job was to try to recruit
Russians and their intelligence officers
Kennedy vasilenko was a kindred spirit
of Jack Platt although for him the risks
of their friendship were much more
perilous he was born in December 1941 in
petropavlovsk-kamchatsky in eastern
Siberia during World War two his father
served in the military and was wounded
in the war when Russia fought Japan in
the coral islands one of his earliest
childhood memories came when his father
killed a bear and brought home the cub
as a playmate for the children
bears grow quickly however on a summer
day we were playing outside near a small
pond and the bear almost drowned me
vasilenko recalled I was lucky a soldier
was passing by and saved my life the
same day my father killed the bear after
the war Kennedy and his mother moved to
her native village near Moscow his
father was sent to East Germany by the
military in the village the war left
only women and a few children the
children had to do the men's jobs in
order to survive there was no
electricity no gas in the village of 11
houses
to go to school we had to walk two miles
on foot in any kind of weather or skate
on the river covered with ice life
improved when at age 10
his uncle returned from the war and took
him hunting the start of vasilenko 'he's
lifelong love of the sport his mother
found a job and with gennadiy moved to
moscow in high school he enjoyed his
love of shooting skiing skating hockey
soccer and gymnastics but volleyball was
his favorite sport and he made the
all-star Moscow team by the time he
graduated from college and engineering
school he was a world-class volleyball
player he was invited to play for dynamo
the volleyball team made up mostly of
KGB officers two of his teammates on
Dynamo worked for the first chief
Directorate the department in charge of
spying overseas and urged vasilenko to
join the KGB he had hoped instead to go
to the 1964 Olympics in Tokyo on the
Soviet volleyball team but he injured
his shoulder while practicing in
Czechoslovakia his Olympic hopes dashed
he joined the KGB first as a civilian
engineer working in computers and
intelligence and in 1971 as an officer
he was sent to the and drop off
Institute near Moscow for three years of
espionage training and was assigned to
the first chief Directorate in yoson AVO
outside Moscow where the KGB's foreign
spies operated from a headquarters
complex that bore a striking resemblance
to the CIA's headquarters in Northern
Virginia his posting to Washington
followed in 1976 intelligence work was
partly a family tradition his father had
been an officer in the KGB's second
chief Directorate which carried out
surveillance of foreigners in the
capital he worked in Washington for six
years undercover in the Soviet embassy
it was while there that he met Jack
Platt when vasilenko was leaving
Washington in 1981 to return to Moscow
and the first
chief Directorate Platt invited him and
his family to come for a farewell drink
the KGB man asked his superiors for
permission he was told not to go and
came anyway Platt said Platt had not
lost hope of recruiting his friend I
said when you come out I'll find you in
March 1984 he went to Guiana and I went
there Platt found vasilenko through a
phone call Kennedy had called the SM UN
the Soviet mission to the UN and instead
of saying hey guys it's me ganodi he
said his full name Platt interpreted the
phone call to mean that vasilenko
knowing that the FBI would be listening
was signaling Platt where he was Guiana
a small South American Republic tucked
in next to Venezuela was first settled
by the Dutch in the 17th century then
became British Guiana in 1831 and an
independent country in 1974 vasilenko it
was a backwater that did not offer much
of an espionage challenge it was a
boring assignment compared to his
previous time in Washington but it gave
Platt the chance he had been waiting for
to recontact his friend in October 1987
Platt flew to Guiana and again met with
vasilenko once more trying to recruit
the KGB man who was happy to see his
friend but again turned him down Platt
did not give up he said he would return
to Guiana and they arranged to meet
there again in February on Platts
birthday a copy of Platts October cabled
to CIA about his meeting with vasilenko
in Guiana fell into Hanson's hands
Hansen misunderstood the cable he
thought it meant that vasilenko had been
recruited by the CIA which was not the
case on November 23rd in an exchange at
deaddrop Park Hansen erroneously
reported to the KGB that vasilenko was a
source working for American intelligence
Hansen by misinterpreting the cable and
passing it to the KGB had
placed yet another life at risk in reply
the KGB left $20,000 for Hanson in the
dead drop on February 8th 1988 there was
another exchange at the dead drop the
Russians left an additional $25,000 for
Hanson along with a personal letter of
thanks from KGB chairman Vladimir
Khrushchev vasilenko could not afford to
report his encounter in Guiana with
Platt
to Moscow headquarters he had become
entirely too friendly with Platt when a
KGB officer is pitched by the CIA he is
required to report it and then is almost
always recalled to Moscow to remove him
from temptation to avoid a recall and
having to explain his actions to the KGB
Vasily encode never reported the meeting
but Hanson had in January 1988 two
months after Hanson put Platts cable in
the deaddrop vasilenko was told to
report to the KGB in Havana but Gennady
often had to go to Havana from Guiana
Platt explained to write the classified
annex to their annual report to Moscow
because Guiana was not considered a safe
residency it was not approved as safe
for comma so he did not think it unusual
to be summoned to Havana when vasilenko
landed in Havana he was met not by the
KGB friend he expected but by another
officer who escorted him to a house
where he was told he would stay during
his visit as soon as vasilenko walked
through the front door he was jumped by
two KGB goons who broke his arm slammed
him to the floor leaving a gash in his
head and accused him of treason he was
sent back to Moscow thrown into LeFort
ovo prison and interrogated for six
months lefur Davo was a notorious place
where spy suspects seldom left alive
many were executed there with a single
shot in the back of the head at
Lefortovo
the interrogation of vasilenko was
relentless we know you are a CIA spy
they warned there's no use to deny it we
have the evidence then his interrogators
rolled out their trump card they lied
and told him they had a tape recording
of him with Jack Platt in Guiana
but vasilenko knew it was not true
because Platt had promised him he would
never record their conversations the KGB
also put three informers in his cell but
vasilenko knew who they were he told
them nothing because he had nothing to
tell
vasilenko who was innocent escaped the
fate of many prisoners at LeFort ovo
after six months of harsh questioning he
was finally released for lack of
evidence
fired from the KGB and left on the
streets of Moscow with no pension and no
job there was a reason never disclosed
publicly that vasilenko was led out of
LeFort ovo in washington vasilenko had
been the case officer for Ronald Pelton
the NSA man who volunteered super-secret
information to the KGB about IV bells in
that operation the NSA had tapped into a
Soviet undersea communications cable in
the Sea of Okhotsk
it was vasilenko who gave Pelton his KGB
codename long soon after Pelton walked
into the Soviet embassy in Washington to
offer his services vasilenko
reconnoitered the NSA man's home he
drove by a street named long and chose
that as Pelton's code name during Vasily
yonkos interrogation he was able to
argue convincingly that if he had really
been recruited to work for US
intelligence he would long ago have
betrayed Pelton to the CIA and the FBI
it was the KGB agent Vitaly Yurchenko
who defected for a time in 1985 who had
provided the leads that led the US
authorities to Pelton Platt learned of
Vasil yonkos arrest in 1988 but did
know who had betrayed him the arrest of
Aldrich Ames in 1994 pointed to one
possible answer but Platt was dubious
that Ames was responsible since Ames was
in Rome in 1987 and would have been
unlikely to see the cable from Guiana
after the collapse of the Soviet Union
in 1991 Platt was overjoyed to learn
that vasilenko had survived prison in a
remarkable post-cold-war story the two
went into business together
in 1993 vasilenko became Platts partner
in the Hamilton Trading Group Inc their
private security company with offices in
McLean Virginia and Moscow but the KGB
and the Russian gulag were not done with
him yet in fact his ordeal had just
begun in 2005 he was imprisoned again
for almost five years on trumped-up
charges of possession of guns and
explosives and a bizarre claim that he
had tried to assassinate an official of
Gazprom the giant Russian natural gas
company guns and ammunition were planted
in his garage
explosives were spread on the steering
wheel of his truck and he was made to
drive the truck to the police so that
the residue would be found on his hands
the attempted murder charge was dropped
but he was sentenced to three years for
alleged illegal possession of firearms
and explosives his sentence was extended
for another two and a half years after
the police claimed he had bribed someone
to get a cell phone he was arrested on
August 25th 2005 the start of his
five-year nightmare he was beaten almost
every day and subjected to physical and
psychological cruelties beginning on the
day of his arrest the official in charge
of vasilenko x' interrogation during
this second longer time in the grip of
the russian prison system was no
ordinary KGB official alexander sasha jo
mauve was a senior officer of the KGB's
ii chief Directorate
directly responsible for the
surveillance of Americans in Moscow it
was Joe mauve who gave orders that
vasilenko be beaten in prison and Joe
mauve who personally led the harsh
interrogations of vasilenko
was embarrassingly well known to the CIA
he had led the agency on a wild-goose
chase for three years it had begun in
1987 when the CIA's Moscow station chief
Jack downing was approached as he
traveled to Leningrad aboard the red
arrow the crack train from Moscow he was
handed an envelope by a stranger who
said in his letter he was a KGB officer
willing to spy for the US he proposed
they communicate in the future by
messages he would drop in Downing's
unlocked car while the CIA station chief
and his wife had dinner at a restaurant
inside the CIA gave him the codename GT
prologue at CIA headquarters in Langley
Virginia the debate raged opinions were
split among the leaders of the Soviet
division was GT prologue a dangled under
KGB control sent to deceive the CIA or
was he a real volunteer but the Russian
was providing some useful information so
the decision was made to run him from a
defector the CIA learned that GT
prologues true name was Alexander Joe
mauve for three years the espionage
dance continued finally they decided to
test zoom off by offering to exfiltrate
him from Moscow he was given an American
passport and a new identity and told he
was to escape from Russia by traveling
from Estonia on a ferry to helsinki but
he never showed up on the ferry and sent
an angry message saying the plan had
endangered his life and he was breaking
contact with the CIA it was clear in
1990 that Joe mauve had been under KGB
control all along
although vasilenko was now in prison on
various new false charges Joe mauve
undoubtedly Howe
he could extract a confession that
vasilenko was an American spy as the KGB
suspected when Hanson had falsely
accused him of working for the CIA
but in prison vasilenko had a dramatic
weapon he used against his oppressors in
prison he kept a diary to document his
torments at the time of my arrest and
before the eyes of my young children and
elderly sick mother he wrote I was
subjected to humiliation and beating by
armed guards and masks beginning at 10
o'clock in the morning when I was beaten
and detained and continuing until 9
o'clock in the evening they his mother
and children were with me without food
or water and in the custody of the armed
men in masks as a result of the beatings
that day and the subsequent harsh
interrogations I lost my hearing and
acquired a damaged knee joint my leg was
swollen and caused me unbearable pain
the abuse continued even when he was on
route to a court hearing I was thrown
face down on the dirty floor of a car
one of the guards constantly kept his
foot on my head or my back I was held
that way for six hours three hours to
the court and three hours back for some
of the beatings the prison authorities
subcontracted the work to other violent
criminals I was kept in a Cell of
individuals convicted for murder
violence robbery etc who had been
instructed to assault me at one point in
2008 he was held for a week in a tomb
without windows without ventilation and
without water and food without a toilet
bucket without exercise in the gulag he
was constantly moved and placed in
solitary confinement eight times all as
part of his punishment for eight months
after his arrest he was held in four
different prisons and that pattern
continued for a month in the spring of
2008 he was held in a prison in Bohr and
then placed in solitary there for four
months in August he was moved for a
week two the prison in Nizhny Novgorod
but a month later he was back in
solitary in Bor then in September he was
shuttled back to nizhny novgorod and
back to war for a fourth bout of
solitary in october he was moved once
again to nizhny novgorod then another
week of solitary in Bor and it continued
that way that fall with him moved back
and forth between the two prisons and
three more solitary confinement s' the
majority of these relocations made no
sense he wrote in his diary I was taken
through these steps only with the goals
of humiliation and psychological and
physical pressure relocated from place
to place I was forced to carry my
personal belongings with me even those
that I was not allowed to use in
describing the prison system vasilenko
portrayed a structure of corruption in
which the authorities and the favored
inmates participated together once in
the Correctional Institution
he wrote each arrival stays for two
weeks in quarantine which is headed by
criminal elements from among those close
to the administration individual
so-called work is carried out with each
person including physical and moral
violence depending on the well-being of
the convict he is forced to contribute a
round sum from 50,000 to 150,000 rubles
and more to the charitable fund
of the prison he is also required to pay
off favored inmates in the form of
products clothing cash deposits etc if
the prisoner does not agree to this then
to begin with he is heavily beaten and
threatened that such beatings will
continue until the end of his prison
sentence for those who still do not
cooperate false charges are made that
results in additional prison term the
most privileged inmates are those who
collaborate with the administration of
the prison this category of individuals
has separate living quarters and the
opportunity to get any food products
including fresh meat poultry and
vegetables
at their disposal our microwave ovens
grills electric stoves televisions video
and audio equipment and even mobile
phones this category of persons can also
go home once per year sometimes for an
additional payment but for most prison
was a grim hopeless existence during
vasilenko 's time in the prison in bor
one accused prisoner was killed one
allegedly hanged himself and one was
half beaten to death struck with a chain
on the head and broke several ribs as a
mark of protest against the lawlessness
convicts went on hunger strikes and slit
their wrists one prisoner cut off his
hand with a circular saw and brought it
to the duty officer all these protests
even those few that with the help of a
family member made their way to a court
or prosecutor were to no avail
in short the gulag was a corrupt
Enterprise from which most were never
free there was little Platt could do to
help vasilenko although he kept up a
barrage of emails to their friends
reporting on each new twist in the case
it was a dark period for the two men but
a better day was coming before Vassily
Anka was sent to the gulag he implied
together secretly played the key role in
one of the most astonishing intelligence
operations in the history of the spy
wars between east and west it is a story
that is told here for the first time
