Chapter 7: A Contagious Disease Is Suspected 
youtube.com/watch?v=bgAEK74P7G4

Paris May 14 1989 felix bloch
strolled down the roof oboe sentano a
one of the world's most expensive
shopping streets
he carried a black bag with a shoulder
strap he stopped to look in the shop
windows he appeared to be studying the
reflections in the glass to see if he
was being followed he was at the request
of the FBI agents of the DST the French
counterintelligence service were
watching at the hotel Meurice across
from the Tuileries he walked through the
ornate chandeliers lobby to a cozy bar
in the rear the man who lived in Vienna
as RINO geekman but called himself
pierre bart in paris was waiting for him
there the two men had whiskey's then
moved downstairs to the hotel's opulent
restaurant Le Meurice a place of dark
paneled wood red walls and hovering
waiters the French counterintelligence
agents were in the restaurant and
secretly photographed the pair block
placed his bag under the table the two
men chatted over wine and dinner block
was the first to leave the restaurant
when geekman Bart left he was carrying
the bag in late May President George HW
Bush flew to Brussels for a two-day
summit meeting of the North Atlantic
Treaty Organization blocks tour in
Vienna had ended two years earlier and
he was back at the State Department now
but he had helped to prepare Bush's trip
so he too flew to the Belgian capital
instead of checking into a hotel Bloch
stayed with Michael E Eli a career
foreign service officer in his large
Pleasant suburban house there is an
informal tradition in the club e foreign
service that a senior diplomat offers
hospitality to visitors of high rank and
since Eli had a swimming pool and three
servants it was a lot nicer than a hotel
block stayed with Eli for two nights on
one of those evenings he had supper out
don't worry about me
block told his colleague I'm having
dinner in town with an old friend Eli a
polite Princeton man insisted on
dropping block off at the Hilton he
remained in his car and did not see whom
Bloch met block walked into the lobby
and up a long curved carpeted stairway
with gold rails he pushed open the glass
doors of the Mazzone de booth a dining
room of soft banquettes and bright
chandeliers there a familiar bearded
companion joined him for dinner once
again Bloch handed over materials to
Pierre Bart
he claimed later they were stamps but
the Brussels meeting created a dilemma
for the FBI it suspected that he planned
to meet again with geekman and it could
not afford to let the meeting take place
unobserved normally the Belgian sweet
Adelita would be asked by the FBI to
observe the meeting but the FBI did not
contact the Belgians we've felt the
Belgian service has been penetrated for
a long time said a US intelligence
officer close to the block case instead
the FBI asked the CIA to provide
surveillance and it did
although reluctantly it was a very risky
business the fact that the agency
covered was very sensitive the
intelligence source said the CIA was
running a covert operation without
telling the host country it was very
dicey the whole station could have
gotten kicked out but incredibly the CIA
Watchers failed to notice whether block
brought a bag to the meeting or left it
with geekman later when investigators
questioned Eli about his wholly innocent
and unwitting role in what happened in
Brussels he could not recall whether
block carried a bag to the hotel and he
did not know if block carried anything
when he returned to the house after
dinner the Eli's had retired early and
block had his own key and let himself in
early in June a few days after the
Brussels meeting rhino geekman
disappeared from Vienna helga Hobart was
devastated he had suddenly vanished from
their house in hietzing and from the
whole fetish Tom T SH the bureaucrats
table at Kern's Hickman was pulled out
of Vienna by the KGB and had gone to
ground in Moscow the reason for his
abrupt departure soon became clear just
after 6:00 a.m. on June 22nd Bloch
received a telephone call at his
apartment in Washington's upscale
Kalorama section from geekman who
identified himself this time as
Ferdinand Paul the FBI was listening the
caller told block that he was calling in
behalf of Pierre who cannot see you in
the near future because he is sick the
caller added pointedly a contagious
disease is suspected he then told block
I am worried about you you have to take
care of yourself Bloch said he hoped the
disease was not serious he wished the
caller well and hung up to The Listening
FBI agents the telephone call was a
bombshell clearly it was a warning to
block that his contacts with the KGB had
been discovered but far worse it meant
that someone inside US intelligence had
tipped off the Russians that block was
under investigation
it was the counter spies worst nightmare
somewhere inside the vast US
intelligence bureaucracy there was a
mole at work and he had not been found
when Bloch reported in to the State
Department the next day three FBI agents
were waiting for him they questioned him
for two and a half hours confronting him
with the surveillance photographs of
both block and geekman taken in the
restaurant in Paris the questioning went
nowhere block denied to the agents that
he had sold secrets to the Soviets block
surrendered his black diplomatic
passport and his blue regular passport
his building pass was revoked and he was
placed on administrative leave the
agents followed Bloch home the next day
he was
questioned again for several hours he
turned over the key to his apartment to
the FBI which removed a briefcase
address books photo albums slides
checkbooks
files and bank and investment records
for the next six months he was never to
be without close surveillance by FBI
agents working in three shifts
round-the-clock none of this was yet
known to the public but James Bamford
working on the ABC News investigative
team in Washington learned of the FBI
probe on July 21st
John F McWethy the State Department
correspondent for ABC News broke the
sensational story that block a State
Department official was under
investigation by the FBI as a suspected
Soviet spy for weeks afterwards Bloch
became the center of a media circus on
television night after night he appeared
on the evening news sometimes walking
mefisto his little white terrier trailed
by reporters cameramen and FBI agents as
he passed by children greeted him as mr.
spy block was in excellent physical
shape he had always walked for exercise
and he led the reporters and the counter
spies on some memorable treks in the
summer heat when Bloch drove from his
apartment at first the press cars
following the FBI cars following blocks
car were reportedly being followed by
Soviet cars the FBI quietly put a stop
to that the Russians dropped out of the
caravan the bureau hoping to overhear
something useful had bugged blocks
silver gray Mercedes but block had
assumed his phones were tapped his car
and apartment bugged his conversations
with his wife in the Mercedes were
unexceptional the FBI was utterly
frustrated clearly someone had tipped
off the KGB and that in turn had led to
the cryptic warning telephone call to
block but with blocks sticking to a
story about simply giving stamps to
Pierre Bart
the FBI was stymied there was no basis
to make an arrest I was able to
interview bloc early in 1990 for almost
14 hours over three days for an article
I wrote in The New York Times Magazine
he insisted his meeting in Paris with
geekman was simply a get-together of to
stamp collectors the bag he left for
geekman he said was filled with stamps
he also claimed he had handed over
stamps to get minh when they met in
Brussels at lunch during one of our
interviews
I asked why he had never said he was
innocent there's no way to prove you are
innocent he said when I asked him
directly whether he had passed secrets
to the Soviets he declined to answer for
the same reason I haven't declared my
innocence whatever else block was he did
collect stamps when I interviewed him in
his apartment in Kalorama he pulled
several albums of stamps from a bookcase
including correspondence and first day
issues going back decades as we talked
mefisto kept trying to jump up on my lap
block said he had searched the dog's
collar looking for FBI bugs but did not
find any block was dismissed by the
State Department and lost his pension of
more than fifty thousand dollars a year
he was never arrested for espionage
never indicted or charged he moved to
Chapel Hill North Carolina where he
worked for a while bagging groceries
he was arrested twice for shoplifting
food his wife filed for divorce
by 2001 he was working as a city bus
driver in Chapel Hill wearing a blue
uniform transit officials in Chapel Hill
said he was a good bus driver
