Chapter 10: Dosvedanya
youtube.com/watch?v=rf4v-_cBM98

although Robert Hanssen had spied for
the Russians for 22 years
his espionage was not continual but in
three distinct stages he first sold
secrets to the GRU in New York only to
be suspected by his wife he promised he
would not do it again he was through
spying he told her
he laid fallow for six years but
recontact at the Russians in 1985 and
from then on switched his spying to the
KGB his most active period occurred from
that year until 1991 then he broke off
again until 1999 when he was suddenly
back in business it was in 1986 early in
his espionage for the KGB that Hanson
did something unusual because he was
still assigned to the FBI New York field
office leaving FBI documents and
retrieving cash from dead drops in
Washington was inconvenient it made for
a lot of extra travel he proposed a new
way to communicate with the Soviets he
thought it would be secure he proposed
his new scheme in a letter to the home
address in Alexandria Virginia of a KGB
officer serving under political cover in
the Soviet embassy in Washington if you
wish to continue our discussions please
have someone run an advertisement in The
Washington Times during the week of 112
87 or 1 1987 for sale dodge diplomat
1971 needs engine work $1,000 give a
phone number and time of day in the
advertisement where I can call Hanson
instructed I will call and leave a phone
number where a recorded message can be
left for me in one hour I will say hello
my name is Ramone I am calling about the
car you offered for sale in The Times
you will respond I'm sorry but the man
with the car is not here can I get your
number the number will be an area code 2
1 2
I will not specify that area code on the
line Hanson had now revealed he was in
New York but provided no other clues to
his identity he also said the KGB should
subtract six months from the dates
Hanson gave on July 14th an ad ran for
four days in the classified pages of the
Washington Times Dodge 71 diplomat needs
engine work $1,000 phone seven zero
three four five one nine seven eight
zero call next Monday Wednesday Friday
1:00 p.m. the number given in the ad was
that of a pay telephone near a shopping
center in Northern Virginia on Monday
July 21st
Hanson called the pay phone the call was
answered by Alexander K fell off a KGB
officer working out of the Soviet
embassy in Washington
Hanson gave the number six to eight
eight zero four seven as arranged he did
not include the New York area code but
two weeks later Hanson sent word that he
had not found a package at the dead drop
park and would call the pay phone again
on August 18th theft was waiting by the
phone Hanson called and the conversation
was recorded by the KGB but fell off
never revealed that he recorded their
conversation
Hanson tomorrow morning theft off uh
yeah and the car is still available for
you and as we have agreed last time I
prepared all the papers and I left them
on the same table
you didn't find them because I put them
in another corner of the table Hanson I
see theft off you shouldn't worry
everything is OK the papers are with me
now
Hanson good TEFL off I believe under
these circumstances mm it's not
necessary to make any changes concerning
the place in the time our company is
reliable and we are ready to give you a
substantial discount
which will be enclosed in the papers now
about the date of our meeting I suggest
that our meeting will be will take place
without delay on February 13th 1 3 1
p.m. ok
February 13th Hansen February 2nd theft
off 13th 1-3 Hansen 1 3 fell off yes
13th 1 p.m.
Anson let me see if I can do that hold
on theft off
ok yeah pause Hansen
whispering unintelligible fell off hello
ok pause Hansen
whispering 6 6 pause that should be fine
falafels ok we will confirm you that the
papers are waiting for you with the same
horizontal tape in the same place as we
did it at the first time Hansen very
good theft off you see after you receive
the papers you will send the letter
confirming it and signing it as usual ok
Hansen excellent theft loss I hope
you'll remember the address is if
everything is ok Hansen I believe it
should be fine and thank you very much
theft off ha ha not at all not at all
nice job for both of us
uh have a nice evening sir Hansen
dosvedanya theft loss bye-bye
although they were talking as
cryptically as possible Hansen could not
resist saying goodbye in Russian which
rather defeated Pfeffer laughs effort to
sound like an American businessman
Hansen kept repeating six so that their
exchange would take place on August 19th
it did and the KGB left $10,000 at the
dead drop
