Chapter 5: Codename Max 
youtube.com/watch?v=8zH0sZzk7KA

Alexander saw
Borowski was a KGB colonel stationed in
Addis Ababa the capital of Ethiopia in
the 1980s he decided to volunteer his
services to the CIA according to an
intelligence official his motivation may
be that he was overseas and not being
paid much and saw his career coming to
an end he may also have resented being
stuck in a backwater in East Africa more
fortunate or well-connected colleagues
might be sent to London Paris or
Washington there was no glitter in Audis
when a Soviet KGB agent contacted the
CIA often hoping to defect to a more
pleasant life in the US the agency
usually tried to persuade the volunteer
to remain as an agent in place where he
could be of continued use once he
defected arrived in the US and was
debriefed of whatever knowledge he had
he would be of lesser further value
Zaporozhye key agreed to remain in place
the CIA gave him the codename max in
these cases typically the CIA would
promise that after a period of time as
an agent in place the Russian could be
flown to the US where he would be
resettled given financial help and if
necessary his identity changed over the
years
zaporozhtzi was in and out of touch with
US intelligence the former official said
but after he volunteered in addis ababa
then he disappeared
later in the 1980s he was assigned to a
presidential security unit in Moscow
dealing with counterintelligence on an
official visit to the US he and his
delegation were at a motel in the
Washington area probably in Virginia
there he was ambushed by the agency they
showed up at the motel around 2:00 a.m.
and he said you're going to get me
killed
let's not do this in the open come to my
hotel room so contact was reestablished
with max three or four different agency
officers dealt with him and he would
only provide
information to a couple of them one he
hated and gave him a lot of useless
information which didn't help max his
reputation with US intelligence he
wanted to be in complete control not
only of methods of communication but
what he talked about Zaporozhye key
identified David Shelton Boone of the
National Security Agency as a Soviet
source max had left the presidential
unit and went back to Directorate K and
figured out Boone's identity Boone was
an army signals intelligence analyst
assigned to NSA headquarters in Fort
Meade Maryland in 1988 he walked into
the Soviet embassy in Washington and
volunteered his services as a spy for
three years at an NSA listening station
in Augsburg Germany Boone continued to
pass the super secret agency secrets to
the KGB in a series of meetings along
the Rhine with Igor his KGB handler he
was paid sixty thousand dollars he
married a German woman and remained in
Germany although max identified Boone
the FBI needed further evidence to
arrest him the bureau called in Dmitry
drew gin ski whose specialty was
impersonating KGB officers a gifted
actor drew gin ski spoke Russian and
eight other languages over a 30 year FBI
career he had achieved remarkable
success in persuading spy suspects to
talk to him about their exploits for the
KGB as a result many were convicted and
sent to prison
he called Boone at his home in Germany
posing as a KGB officer he told Boone an
airline ticket would be sent to him and
a hotel room awaiting him in London he
said his people were interested in
making contact with him again and he
would be paid I'm at your disposal
Boone replied in London the secrets
Boone told drew gin ski that he gave to
the Russians included a top secret NSA
signals intelligence directive five
14 revealing the Soviet targets of US
nuclear weapons and a 300-page J tens
manual each page marked top secret Umbra
a designation above top secret which
served as a handbook of the entire US
spy satellite program Boone agreed to
meet drew Jin ski again at Dulles
Airport and the FBI was waiting in the
hotel room
Boone's revelations in London were all
on tape he pleaded guilty and was
sentenced to 24 years in prison
in the meantime max had gone to ground
again for two or three years we heard
nothing from max the former intelligence
official said he was still in place in
1993 when he provided the missing piece
the information that gene furtive weighs
mole hunters needed to seal the fate of
Aldrich Ames max said I don't know who
the mole is
but his handler is going to Lima Ames
met his KGB handlers three times in
Bogota at the time there were no direct
flights from Moscow to Bogota passengers
had to fly through Lima to get there he
had gone to Bogota ostensibly to visit
his wife's family in Colombia it was
time to call in the FBI in January the
CIA mole hunt team began briefing the
bureau Ames was the chief suspect there
was no longer any doubt
