Chapter 28: The Sleeping Tiger
youtube.com/watch?v=E6rxCAnYDlA

although the FBI now had a substantial
amount of evidence against Hanson in
order to arrest him and be sure of a
conviction it was essential to catch him
in an act of espionage to do so would
require that he be placed under
surveillance it would have been a great
deal easier to do if Hanson worked at
headquarters but for the past five and a
half years he had been assigned to the
State Department as the FBI's senior
representative to the office of foreign
missions the office was in charge of
relations with the foreign embassies in
Washington as well as consulates and UN
missions it was created by law in 1982
after the controversy over the hilltop
location of the Soviet embassy in
Washington and the bugging of the
American Embassy in Moscow the lawmakers
felt it was time to have a watchdog over
the foreign embassies and especially the
Soviets it was no accident that the
first head of OFM with the rank of
ambassador was James E nolan jr. who had
been chief of the Soviet section of the
FBI and then moved up to the number two
counterintelligence position in the
Bureau at the time Soviet diplomats were
required to book all travel through OFM
if the Russians needed repairs at the
Embassy they were required to call OFM
this of course opened up all sorts of
interesting possibilities for US
intelligence agencies the plumber or
electrician sent to the embassy might
work for the CIA after the Soviet Union
collapsed many of these restrictions
were removed Russian diplomats no longer
had to book travel or hire repair people
through OFM but Russian diplomats in the
embassy consulates or at the UN missions
were still required to notify OFM to
travel more than 25 miles from where
they were stationed and might in some
cases have to get prior approval
the same or similar travel restrictions
were imposed on diplomats from China and
on the UN representatives of Cuba North
Korea Iran and Syria all embassies in
the US were also required to notify OFM
for review of any planned renovations in
May of 1995 Robert Hansen was dispatched
to the State Department as the FBI's
senior representative to the office of
foreign missions he moved into room 25
10c on the second floor of the Maine
State Department building Hansen
ironically was also head of an
interagency counterintelligence Group in
OFM he also served as the FBI liaison to
the State Department's office of
intelligence and research in December
2000 soon after mr. PIM provided the
secret file that led to the
identification of Hansen as the mole the
FBI placed him under surveillance it had
to be done cautiously since he was after
all a trained counterintelligence agent
and might detect any waters but the
surveillance was done by the Gees
the FBI's special surveillance group and
they were good at their jobs they
dressed like ordinary civilians workmen
repairing a street for example to avoid
attracting attention
it remained cumbersome however to watch
Hansen at the State Department the
problem was how to lure him back to FBI
headquarters without arousing his
suspicions Hansen's strong interest in
computers provided the answer he prided
himself on his computer skills which
were considerable and the counter spies
decided to exploit that fact and offer
him a promotion and a job in computers
Mike wags pack called Hansen into
headquarters in December
Hansen seemed extremely tense at their
meeting wags packed thought he knew the
reason Hansen
feared his espionage had finally been
detected
but when wags pack a high-level
counterintelligence official
offered Hanson a cushy job in the senior
executive service at higher pay he
visibly relaxed the service is the elite
core of the federal government Hanson's
new responsibilities wags PAC explained
would be to ensure that new computer
programs developed by the bureau would
be secured a few days later Hanson met
with Gallagher the division chief for
the final job interview I asked him to
take the special assignment Gallagher
said it promoted him into SES it
recognized him for his computer
expertise we were playing on his ego
Hanson was delighted it was about time
the bureau even belatedly was
recognizing his brilliance the senior
levels of the Intelligence Division were
finally taking notice he would be back
at headquarters after his long exile at
state with a coveted parking spot in the
FBI garage in the meantime he could not
neglect his spying for Moscow on
December 12th
he was seen driving four times past Foxx
Stone Park the site of deaddrop Ellis it
was a significant moment for the first
time the bureau now had evidence that
Hanson was an active spy it is much
harder to prove the case against a spy
who was gone to ground now there was a
chance that Hanson could be caught in
the act
to that end the FBI with approval of the
Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Court
tapped Hanson's home and office
telephones and searched his car before
Hanson moved into his new FBI office on
the 9th floor technicians installed a
tiny concealed video camera the images
were relayed by closed-circuit
television to the Washington field
office where they were constantly
monitored the FBI could not gain access
to Hanson
house to search it or plant bugs because
his wife or children were always there
but the FBI found another way to keep
the Hanson residence under surveillance
a house across the street was put up for
sale in December the owners were
delighted when a woman calling herself
and Manning paid three hundred and sixty
two thousand five hundred dollars all
cash on December 22nd only twelve days
after the house went on the market
Miz Manning did not seem to care about
the loose bathroom tiles or other
problems that buyers complain about one
neighbor was curious when a telephone
lineman said he had installed eight
lines for the new owner apparently miss
Manning really liked to talk on the
phone a lot on Christmas Eve wags pack
encountered Hanson at midnight mass at
st. Andrew's Church in Clifton Virginia
they wished each other a Merry Christmas
wags pack thought to himself I hope you
have a joyous Christmas because this
will probably be your last one the day
after Christmas Hanson cruised by Fox
Stone Park again three times looking for
a taped signal late in the afternoon he
stopped his car for several seconds
studying the park sign then drove off
just before 9:00 p.m. he parked his car
near the park entrance walked over to
the signal sight and swept the beam of
his flashlight up and down the wooden
posts near the sign he must have found
nothing because he turned and walked
away raising his arms in exasperation it
was time for Hanson to wrap up his work
at the State Department and get ready to
move to his new position at headquarters
On January 12th
Tom burns his boss at the office of
foreign missions and a former FBI
colleague presided over a going-away
party for Hanson at the China garden
restaurant in Arlington Virginia 15 to
20 colleagues turned out to wish Hansen
well as his superior I made the usual
perfunctory remarks
burne said we'll miss you and don't be a
stranger
only later did he realize the irony of
his words when a colleague left he would
traditionally be given a unique souvenir
usually we would give a diplomatic
license plate with his name on it
mounted on wood burns explained the
office of foreign missions controlled
the distinctive red white and blue
license plates issued to foreign
diplomats a familiar sight in the
capital but the plate was not ready
so Hanson did not receive the souvenir
license plate with the name Bob in big
letters On January 15 2001 Hanson
reported in to room 99 30 at FBI
headquarters in his new job the days of
sharing cramped cubicles were behind him
we gave him a nice office Gallagher said
before long however Hanson began to be
suspicious about his sudden good fortune
several times that month he searched the
FBI database looking for his name and
other signs that he might be under
investigation but the counter spies had
made sure there was nothing there to be
found
On January 30th the FBI secretly
searched Hanson's Taurus in the glove
compartment
they found a roll of white adhesive tape
of the kind he used to signal the KGB in
the trunk they found several
dark-colored garbage bags similar to the
one that Mr. Pim had provided in Moscow
with Hanson's fingerprints in the trunk
the agents also discovered a box
containing classified documents several
were about then-current FBI
counterintelligence investigations and
were classified secret for all of the
elaborate precautions that Hanson took
to protect his identity from the
Russians he was remarkably careless in
guarding his own treachery in early
february FBI agents searched Hanson's
office at headquarters they were elated
to find several communications to and
from the SVR on a computer flash drive
by early February Hansen had become
convinced that his transfer to
headquarters and sudden elevation to a
higher status within the bureau were
suspect he was very enthusiastic for the
new assignment at least at first
Gallagher recalled but he began to
realize he didn't have a meaningful job
we didn't want him to have access to any
classified or sensitive information we
gave him things to do a lot of make work
by now
Hansen realized that his career as a
Russian spy was unraveling rapidly he
composed what was to be his last message
to Moscow it read in part dear friends I
thank you for your assistance these many
years it seems however that my greatest
utility to you has come to an end and it
is time to seclude myself from active
service since communicating last I have
been promoted to a higher do-nothing
senior executive job outside of regular
access to information within the
counterintelligence program I strongly
suspect you should have concerns for the
integrity of your compartment concerning
knowledge of my efforts on your behalf
something has aroused the sleeping tiger
perhaps you know better than I life is
full of its ups and downs my hope is
that you will have provided some
sufficient means of recontact if not I
will be in contact next year same time
same place
perhaps circumstances then will have
improved your friend Ramon Garcia
despite his warning that something has
aroused the sleeping tiger and that
therefore he was in great danger
Hansen could not quite bring himself to
bid a final goodbye to his friends he
needed them too much so he promised to
be back in touch next year same time but
the tiger was no longer sleeping Robert
Hanssen had run out of time
