Chapter 8: The Innocent Man 
youtube.com/watch?v=KjRuemB9KPw

the arrest of Aldrich Ames in 1994 had
appeared to explain most although not
all of the betrayals of the Russians
working for the CIA and the FBI almost a
decade earlier but the KGB's warning to
felix bloch in 1989 of the FBI's
investigation of him created a critical
counterintelligence dilemma it meant
that someone inside US intelligence had
tipped off the KGB to the block
investigation it could not have been
Aldrich Ames because the
counterintelligence professionals were
able to confirm that Ames had no access
to the block case it followed therefore
that someone other than Ames had alerted
the KGB and block the conclusion was
very bad news and inescapable there was
a second mole brian kelly was well known
and much admired in the
counterintelligence world he had built
his career as a specialist on illegals
the Russian spies sent West without
benefit of diplomatic cover Kelly had
headed the illegals group at the CIA his
was an arcane difficult specialty
because illegals are rarely detected
they do not pose as diplomats and often
steal the identities of long dead or
living persons they can be anybody it
was Kelly who was credited with
unmasking rino geekman as a KGB illegal
although geekman had apparently been
seen entering the back door of the
Soviet embassy in Vienna that in itself
did not prove he was an illegal moreover
as far as the Austrian intelligence
service could tell geekman had never met
with felix bloch in vienna when he
arranged to dine with block in paris in
mid May of 1989
and left with the airline bag that block
had placed under the table he had used
the name
Pierre Bart since geekman claimed to be
a Finn
attempting to penetrate his legend as
the false background created for
illegals are known Kelley would have
contacted Finnish intelligence and
investigators in Finland discovered that
the man who called himself RINO geekman
had written to the Finnish Orthodox
Church in h√§meenlinna Finland from
Bremen West Germany in the spring of
1966 geekman enclosed a copy of a
purported birth certificate showing he
was born March 27 1930 in Eno Corellia
in a portion of Finland that became
Soviet territory but none of the people
in enno knew the name geekman where he
claimed he was born records from that
village had been moved to coop in
central Finland but in 1952 for registry
books had been stolen from coop eyo
almost certainly by the KGB as a result
it was impossible to verify the
information on geek man's birth
certificate but since the copy looked
real the church issued him an original
once he had that geekman was able to
obtain a valid Finnish passport later in
1966 he moved to Finland he lived in
three towns in Finland doubtless to
build his cover in the summer of 1967 he
moved to Helsinki in 1968 he married a
woman named Marta nieminen in Turku a
river town in southwest Finland the next
year they moved to Dusseldorf where a
son was born in 1969 then they moved
back to Finland to Espoo an affluent
suburb of Helsinki geek mends elaborate
legend illustrated the lengths to which
the KGB went to create an invented
identity for an illegal and the
complexity of Kelly's task inside the
CIA Brian Kelly was widely known and
respected as the officer who had
unmasked geekman and made the block case
he received a medal from the agency for
his work in uncovering the trail that
led to block yet in the wilderness of
mirrors that is counterintelligence it
was precisely because Kelly had broken
the block case through his patient
investigative work that he fell under
suspicion by the FBI because of that
success in a story that could have been
written by Franz Kafka his career came
crashing down and his life tragically
upended but Brian Kelly was innocent he
was not a mole he was a loyal and
dedicated CIA officer Kelly had joined
the CIA after 20 years in the Air Force
at the agency Kelly was a career officer
in the Directorate of operations a
euphemism for the agency's clandestine
side the spies and counter spies he had
carved out his illegals specialty almost
from the start he worked
counterintelligence cases in New York
City in the early 1980s and later was
posted to Panama returning from there at
the end of 1997 long divorced he had a
daughter who also worked at the CIA and
two sons his ordeal began with a mistake
by a CIA asset
Alexander zapper Aashiqui codename max
the KGB colonel who had volunteered to
spy for the u.s. several years earlier
he provided the vital tip that helped
the CIA identify Aldrich Ames but now he
claimed erroneously that the new mole
that Mike Rochford and the FBI were
seeking had worked on the Block case as
it turned out the real mole had never
worked on the case but had learned of
the FBI investigation of Bloch and
betrayed it to the KGB the KGB in turn
alerted block in the phone call from
geekman who used the name ferdinand paul
and warned about a contagious disease
mole hunters typically construct a
matrix matching the secrets believed to
have been compromised with the names of
the people who had access to those
secrets
then they tried to winnow down the list
eliminating the names for example of
those whose access occurred only after
the suspected date that the information
leaked in this case a matrix including
Brian Kelly's name would only have
reinforced the FBI's mistake
there was also an institutional problem
the bureau was reluctant to think that
whoever tipped off the KGB to the block
investigation could be someone in its
own ranks it preferred to think the mole
was in the CIA when Kelly returned from
Panama he was blissfully unaware that a
few miles away across the Potomac his
life was under microscopic examination
by the FBI Kelley was assigned to review
the blocked Case Files
to go over them again to make sure that
nothing had been missed but the task was
a subterfuge designed to keep him busy
and cut off from other CIA operations
and secrets at the FBI Mike Rochford was
in charge of the squad assigned to find
the mole when suspicions focused on
Kelly the FBI gave him the codename gray
deceiver the more Rochford studied
Kelly's career the more convinced he
became erroneously that he had found the
mole and that it was Brian Kelley it was
not just Rochford his view was shared by
the FBI's senior counterintelligence
officials the FBI applied to the Foreign
Intelligence Surveillance Court and
obtained permission to place the CIA man
under intense scrutiny his home in
Vienna Virginia was bugged and secretly
searched as was his garbage his
telephones tapped and his every move
carefully watched the FBI was alarmed
but also reassured erroneously
that it was in fact on the trail of the
Russian mole inside the CIA when it
learned that Brian Kelley was planning
to travel to the Canadian border at
Niagara Falls it was alarmed because the
bureau's counter spies knew that KGB
intelligence officers IOS in the FBI's
vocabulary were
known to slip over the border from
Canada into the u.s. to meet a source
the FBI hoped that it might catch a
Russian spy in the act of meeting
secretly with Kelly Canada was also a
favorite staging ground used by the
Russians to insert illegals spies
without the protection of diplomatic
status into the United States in the
most notable case Rudolf Abel at KGB
illegal slipped over the border from
Canada in 1948 and set up in Brooklyn in
New York City as a photographer and
artist
he was later betrayed by his KGB
assistant caught convicted and sent to a
federal prison in 1962 in the early
morning chill on the Glen Echo bridge in
Berlin he was famously traded for
Francis Gary Powers the CIA u2 pilots
shot down over spared loves he was
captured convicted in a show trial in
Moscow and imprisoned the trade was
described at the time in the u2 affair
my book co-authored with Thomas B Ross
and in 2017 in Steven Spielberg's film
bridge of spies
although Kelly did not know it he was
under intense FBI surveillance on his
trip to Niagara Falls in
counterintelligence work once a person
falls under suspicion the investigators
may seize upon innocent events and
circumstances that suddenly take on
ominous meaning when Kelly traveled to
Niagara Falls
the FBI Watchers were with him because
Kelly a loyal American was wrongly
suspected as a Russian spy the FBI
thought he might be getting ready to
meet a KGB contact the bureau was ready
to pounce Kelly in fact was there on a
counterintelligence investigation for
the CIA but the bureau persuaded itself
that he was taking evasive action known
in the spy trade as dry cleaning to lose
a tail we had surveillance on him and
lost him at the border a former FBI
counterintelligence official said we
thought he was cleaning himself
the FBI counter spies reasoned that
Kelly was taking evasive action by using
an SDR Bureau jargon for a surveillance
detection route the FBI thought they had
spotted a known Russian intelligence
officer in the vicinity but they saw no
meeting with Kelly however that was far
from the whole story
the FBI's surveillance of Kelly at the
Canadian border took an unexpected and
awkward turn he went into Canada
the former counter spy said that created
a dilemma for the FBI under the rules
the FBI was not allowed to operate on
Canadian soil at least not without
official permission
the CSIS the Canadian Secret
Intelligence Service would be unhappy if
we followed him he said so the FBI
surveillance operation had the potential
for a diplomatic rift between Washington
and Ottawa all the FBI source would say
was we did lose him at the border in
Panama Kelly had been seen brushing past
what one FBI agent called an individual
suspected of a connection to Russian
intelligence it was a very quick pass
there could have been a verbal exchange
as well but for all the bureau knew the
man may have been a source recruited by
Kelly for the CIA he was never asked
about the contact the physical
surveillance was carried out by the geez
the bureau's special surveillance group
the Gees were on him for a long time a
former FBI agent said when the FBI
secretly searched Kelly's home agents
found a map of nearby Nottoway Park with
what it regarded as suspicious markings
Soviet intelligence officers had been
seen in the vicinity of the park and the
discovery of the map added to Rochford
x' and the bureau's conviction that the
investigation was on the right track try
as it would
furred squad even with the benefit of
the Watchers and electronic
eavesdropping was not able to make a
case against Kelly it could not do so
for the simple reason that he was
totally innocent so the FBI decided to
run a sting against him
perhaps if Kelly could be duped into
thinking the FBI was on to his supposed
espionage he would try to run in
November 1998 a stranger appeared at the
door of his home in a thick foreign
accent the man said the authorities now
knew about his spying a stranger handed
him a piece of paper with an escape plan
and told him to be at a nearby subway
station the next evening then the man
disappeared into the night
the FBI sting failed for two reasons
Kelly was not a spy and he reported the
bizarre incident to the FBI the next
morning he gave a description of the
foreigner so that a bureau artist could
sketch the man
but the FBI simply assumed that Kelly
was too clever to fall for the sting he
was so cool and confident Rochford
believed that inside the Washington
field office Kelly became known as the
Iceman
espionage is a very difficult crime to
prove when the FBI's various stratagems
including the stranger at the door with
an escape plan failed to work it decided
to confront Kelly sometimes when that
happens a suspect will confess often in
the desperate hope that he will be
turned and played back by the bureau
against the Russians as a double agent
instead of being sent to prison on
August 18th 1999
Kelly was summoned to a meeting in a
small conference room at CIA
headquarters awaiting him there were two
special agents of the FBI
Rudy Guerin and Doug Gregory wearin' was
one of the agents who five years earlier
had arrested Aldrich Ames Gregory though
not on Radford's mole hunting squad was
called in because he had earned a
reputation as the best in
to gator in the FBI's New York division
in his late 50s of medium height with
gray hair and glasses
he was known to be methodical and
thorough any hard case they turned over
to Doug Gregory an FBI colleague said
the two FBI men were blunt they accused
Kelly of being a Russian spy they knew
all about his activities they told him
and even claimed to know his SVR code
name for Kelly it was a very scary
moment by now Congress had changed the
law and espionage carried the death
penalty the FBI agents triumphantly
pulled out a copy of the marked map of
Nodaway Park that they had taken from
his home the FBI had stamped it secret
the spy map the agents informed him was
proof that he was the long-sought
Russian mole the x marks and the times
written on the map indicated when and
where he had placed secret documents in
dead-drops how do you explain this one
of the agents shouted where did you get
my jogging map
Kelly countered the questioning went on
for several hours the agents urging
Kelly to confess his capital crime Kelly
insisted he had nothing to confess the
agents ratcheted up the pressure unless
he admitted his espionage they said they
would have to question members of his
family including over Kelly's strong
objections his frail 84 year old mother
who was in a nursing home
Kelly stood firm at the end of the
interrogation
Kelly was escorted out of CIA
headquarters by a counterintelligence
officer who took his badge he was placed
on administrative leave that was to last
21 months in limbo falsely accused as a
spy and facing a possible death penalty
Kelly
having served his country for 37 years
had nowhere to turn he could only wait
and hope that he would eventually be
cleared of the crime he knew he had not
committed
on that same afternoon in August while
Kelly was being confronted by Gregory
and wearin his 28 year old daughter a
CIA employee in the agency's personnel
department was escorted to a small
windowless room with a table and four
metal chairs two FBI agents a man and a
woman were there please sit down one of
the agents told her we have some bad
news for you frightened
Kelly's daughter could not imagine what
had happened your father is a spy the
FBI agent said he's working for the
Russians the room seemed to spin Kelly's
daughter loved her father and had
followed in his footsteps by joining the
CIA when the FBI man accused her father
of espionage It was as though her world
had suddenly disintegrated she began to
shake and weep uncontrollably she stood
up and turned away from the agents
facing the wall still sobbing after a
few moments she regained her composure
and sat down the interview continued the
male agent did the questioning while a
younger female agent took notes the FBI
man pulled out a copy of the jogging map
and informed her it showed the location
of dead drops she denied her father
could possibly be a spy but that
appeared to infuriate the agent he
pounded the table come on he yelled we
know what he did
agents fanned out to find the other
family members and the same scene was
repeated over the next 48 hours Kelly's
ex-wife his two sons and two sisters
were all interrogated by the FBI in
Connecticut the agents warned Kelly's
sister that if she did not cooperate
they would question her ailing mother in
the nursing home in Kentucky the FBI
caught up with Kelly's younger son at
his office flashed the map which they
said had come from his father's den and
explained that it proved he was a
Russian spy after an hour the distraught
son lurched past his staring coworkers
and out into the rain to be alone
he wondered could it possibly be true in
Manhattan
the FBI located Kelly's oldest son who
was on a business trip and about to
leave for a flight back to Washington
the agents escorted him to LaGuardia
Airport questioning him as the car
crawled through the rush-hour traffic as
soon as he got home that evening he
called his father and drove to his house
in Vienna
his father was waiting in the driveway I
just want to make sure you believe me he
said you never have to worry about that
his son replied as they hugged in the
end after pleas by family members the
FBI did not interview Kelly's mother in
the nursing home but several of his
friends and colleagues were interviewed
and sworn to silence as summer turned to
fall Kelly was having repeated problems
with the telephones at his home in
October a technician dispatched by the
telephone company to investigate the
trouble found a bug on the line all
during 2000 and into 2001 Brian Kelly
remained on leave barred from Langley
headquarters the experience his attorney
John Moustakas said was emotionally
devastating to him and his family Kelly
told friends he never would have gotten
through it all but for a parish priest
in whom he confided who helped him cope
Kelly and his children lived with
uncertainty for 18 months finally having
found no evidence to support its
suspicions about Kelly the FBI asked
whether he would be willing to take a
polygraph test to confirm that he was
not a Russian spy he agreed when the
test was over the operator told him he
had shown no evidence of deception he
was finally reinstated by the CIA in May
2001 however he no longer worked on
Russian illegals and was reassigned to a
different job he never requested a
monetary settlement from the CIA for the
trauma he endured for so long falsely
accused as a Russian spy
I and precipitously expelled from the
headquarters building he did not ask for
or get a settlement Patricia
Trish Kelly his wife said he just wanted
to go back to clear his name he did that
but the months of groundless suspicion
had damaged his CIA career beyond repair
