Chapter 30: Caught
youtube.com/watch?v=1HSljs_Ezns

in the lexicon of the KGB 
and its successor the SVR an iron
sight is a fixed location that is one
made of iron to be used on a specified
date once a year
Moscow never wants to lose touch with an
agent but sometimes a mole working for
the KGB in a foreign intelligence
service may break off contact for a
variety of reasons circumstances may
make it too risky for a while for a mole
to continue stealing secrets if all
other means of communication should fail
the agent knows he can always make
recontact at the iron site on July 31st
2000 the KGB sent a dear ramon letter to
Robert Hanssen whose true name he never
revealed to Moscow proposing an iron
sight exchange every February in case of
break off in our contacts we propose to
use DD deaddrop Ellis once a year on 18
February on that day we can carry out a
full exchange operation you will unload
your package and put a signal we shall
withdraw it load our package and put our
signal you will remove our package and
put your signal Ellis was the hiding
place underneath the footbridge in Fox
Stone Park near his home in Northern
Virginia as it happened Hansen's good
friend Jack hot shower was visiting the
Hansen's on that Sunday February 18 2001
it was a little after 4:00 p.m. that day
when Hanson dropped him off at Dulles
Airport to catch his flight the special
surveillance group the Gees had followed
Hanson to the airport he said goodbye to
ha shower and pulled out his silver
Taurus heading east
the Gees stayed on him the bureau was
sure that Hanson would appear at Fox
Stone Park that Sunday because it had
found on
computer flashdrive the July 2000 letter
from the SVR designating Ellis as the
dead drop to be used once a year on
February 18th the FBI thought it knew
exactly when he would appear at the park
when agents had searched Hanson's palm
free computer they found an entry for
Ellis February 18th 8:00 p.m. the FBI
had been waiting for three months hoping
to catch Hanson in the act of passing
secrets to the KGB before arresting him
for espionage that chance was now at
hand after days of preparation
everything was ready for the arrest
which officials at FBI headquarters and
agents in the Washington field office
expected to go down shortly after 8:00
p.m.
Neal Gallagher the intelligence chief
had arrived at FBI headquarters at 1:00
p.m. for a final briefing in the
strategic information Operations Center
s IOC the secure area on the fifth floor
where officials monitor major operations
the floor of the s IOC is raised so that
the space below it can be periodically
swept for electronic bugs the setting is
what film buffs might expect with large
television monitors computers wall
clocks set four time zones around the
world and sophisticated communications
equipment in mid afternoon Gallagher
returned to his office on the seventh
floor at headquarters to grab a sandwich
nothing was going to happen for a while
from the telephone taps on Hanson's
house the FBI knew that his daughter
Jane his son-in-law
Richard Trimble and their children were
expected for Sunday dinner but instead
of driving directly home from the
airport to join them Hanson suddenly
pulled into the Pyke's 7 Plaza shopping
center in Northern Virginia as the Gees
watched from a discreet distance
Hanson opened his car trunk he leaned
into the trunk for a long time
Tim Caruso and other FBI agents were
and in the command van in a parking lot
about a mile from the entrance to fox
stone park then the unexpected happened
an agent in the van relaying
minute-by-minute reports from the
watching geez exclaimed he's got some
documents and he's putting them in a
plastic bag Caruso and the other FBI
agents were astonished Hansen was hours
ahead of schedule
he's going to do this right now Caruso
said in broad daylight Hansen had
prepared a package for the Russians with
four classified FBI documents and his
sleeping tiger cover letter but he
decided while racing back from Dulles to
add three more documents he opened the
package put them in and re taped the
plastic bag all seven documents were
classified secret they related to
current and proposed FBI
counterintelligence operations against
Russian agents in the United States at
headquarters
Gallagher's phone rang something unusual
was going on he was told you may want to
get down to the SI OC right away I got
down there a minute or so later
Gallagher began trying to reach FBI
director Louis Freeh si OC was paging
him repeatedly but got no answer at the
shopping mall Hanson slammed the car
trunk shut got back in the Taurus and
drove the short distance to Fox Stone
Park Debra Evans Smith the squad
supervisor for the Hanson case at the
Washington field office had been waiting
for this moment
Smith was stationed in the command van
with Caruso and Dan Cloyd Caruso's
deputy this was it an FBI SWAT team was
already in place just out of sight of
the entrance to fox stone park they wore
bulletproof vests because no one knew
whether Hanson who had boasted of his
skill with guns and owned an extensive
personal armory might start shooting
when agents tried to arrest him
Caruso was right Hansen was not waiting
for dark he pulled up across from the
park entrance and gone out of his car he
placed a vertical piece of white tape on
the post of the park sign to indicate to
the Russians that the drop would be
ready to clear within minutes Washington
field called the s IOC he's at the park
they reported carrying the package
Hansen disappeared into the woods it was
4:30 4:00 p.m. he walked deep into the
park following the path that led to the
weathered wooden foot bridge above
deaddrop
Ellis it took him about four minutes he
looked around and seeing no one slipped
the package under the bridge then he
walked back out of the park it had been
a pleasant Sunday church as usual of
course playing frisbee with the dog
seeing good old Jack again then a quick
visit to the deaddrop so convenient to
his house and leaving documents for
which the Russians had always rewarded
him so well now it was time to head home
Bonnie would have supper waiting he
crossed the road and was only a few feet
from his car at that instant two vans
suddenly appeared from both directions
screeching to a halt blocking Hanson's
car four agents jumped out some carrying
huge mp5 automatic weapons and
surrounded him for backup agents were
ready to move in if needed it was the
last moment of freedom that Robert
Hansen would enjoy for the rest of his
life
you're under arrest one of the FBI men
said put your hands in the air
Hanson did not comply immediately and
the agent repeated the command do you
have a weapon he was asked No Hanson
replied the agents made sure quickly
Hanson was handcuffed with his arms
behind his back and hustled into an SUV
at almost the same moment
finally reached free who started for
headquarters Hansen meanwhile was being
driven to the FBI field office in
Tyson's Corner not far from his home
Doug Gregory the case agent for the gray
day investigation was in the car with
the prisoner Hansen was read his Miranda
rights in the car the agents played the
tape for Hansen of his conversation more
than 14 years earlier with KGB officer
Alexander fell off they showed him
photographs of the drop sites he had
used and copies of his letters to the
SVR that had been retrieved from his
computer it was a kind of psychological
warfare designed to convince Hansen that
the evidence against him was
overwhelming he was asked if he had ever
spied for anyone other than the Russians
no one but the Russians he replied then
Hansen claimed he had wanted to get
caught for how long he was asked since I
started he said
he promised to tell everything now that
it was over he wanted to know how Bonnie
would get the news two agents were on
the way to his house he was told
Hansen's life is over Doug Gregory was
thinking Bob this is a sad day for all
of us
Gregory said this is just terrible
expressionless Hansen replied life has
its ups and downs
