Chapter 17: Showtime
youtube.com/watch?v=5of3IgWqb9A

when Platt returned
to the US he met with Mike Rochford in
Moscow Platt recounted he had met four
or five former KGB types but one in
particular
Alexander Shcherbakov he thought might
interest Rochford
the ex KGB man was eager to come to the
US and find a business opportunity Platt
also relayed his clear impression that
sure Birkhoff was hungry for money
Rochford was pleased to hear the news
whether or not it might lead anywhere
another KGB man was almost within reach
for Rochford it was as though a fly had
unexpectedly flown into his spiderweb
but a lot of preparations would have to
be made first and foremost Rochford
would have to come up with a plausible
businessman who knew the art world well
and could talk convincingly about
Russian artifacts he would also have to
be a good actor and willing to pose as a
potential buyer of Shcherbakov swears it
was a tall order but Rochford found the
perfect businessman an FBI special agent
was a friend of William G stout a member
of the curatorial staff and Registrar at
the prestigious Frick Collection in New
York by great good luck as it happened
stout had previously worked for the FBI
for more than ten years with his FBI
career long since passed stout according
to Platt was somewhat reluctant at first
to take on his unusual acting role but
Platt had charmed and recruited a lot of
agents in his career I spent two days
with him in New York Platt said and he
agreed stout also got a green light
from the FBI's New York field office
Stout was more than qualified for what
the FBI asked him to do he had an
unusual background combining the arts
with law enforcement he had earned a
bachelor's degree in international
relations Asian Studies and classical
hist
at Indiana University of Pennsylvania
after college he joined the FBI in 1974
I was a language specialist and
supervisor he said while at the FBI he
was sent to the Defense Language
Institute and earned another degree in
Eastern European languages Czech and
Slovak he left the FBI a decade later to
go to graduate school at the Fashion
Institute of Technology where he
received a master's degree in Museum
Studies and decorative arts after that I
worked at the Getty as a fellow and then
to Frick as registrar at the Frick he
had a broad range of responsibilities
from working with the curators to
supervising the care of exhibits his
adventure began when his FBI friend
called him he said they were looking for
someone from the New York art world to
contact a Russian who wanted to sell art
objects in America forced out the
unexpected request from his friend was
the beginning of a roller coaster ride
in New York and Virginia with mysterious
intelligence operatives who revealed
very little about themselves very
quickly my FBI agent friend and I were
flown to Washington we were picked up at
the airport and driven somewhere they
never said where it was maybe Langley
CIA headquarters
they went over what they were looking
for me to do they were not offering last
names a lot of first names stout said
they called me bill but stout had worked
on some espionage cases at the FBI and
knew better than to ask a lot of
questions they sent out for pizza I
spent the night at a hotel somewhere in
Virginia the next day I was taken to the
FBI field office at buzzards point in
Washington I wasn't aware of the
importance of the case until I was there
and was introduced to a higher level of
agents they briefed me on the procedure
my first action was to write a letter to
this man in Russia I was acting as a
go-between the Russian
and my clients in New York who I said
were interested in Russian artifacts if
he could find the time I would fly him
over
give him a per diem and discuss what he
had to offer and what I had to offer I
asked him to bring a sample stout wrote
the letter on his personal letterhead
with his New York home address he was
careful not to use the Frick's
letterhead but identified himself as the
Registrar at the Frick in Moscow
Shcherbakov was elated to receive stouts
letter his pleas to Platt had produced
the invitation he so badly wanted he
entreated vasilenko to help him obtain a
new passport since his own had expired
vasilenko assisted him with the passport
and other documents he would need when
the paperwork was complete Shcherbakov
wrote back to stout accepting the
invitation I received a reply from the
Russian and made a reservation for him
at the Benjamin in Manhattan stout said
the Benjamin at 125 East 50th Street
describes itself as a luxury boutique
hotel I wrote again Stout recalled
saying his plane ticket was waiting for
him in Moscow at the airlines office in
late June of 2000 Shcherbakov arrived in
New York Stout was waiting for him in
the lobby of the Benjamin he described
his visitor in words that evoked his FBI
training I'm 6 foot 1 and he was shorter
than me maybe 510 185 pounds brown hair
he wore a suit he was pleasant looking
with a friendly face no facial hair
he was personable he knew his way around
people I was expecting a professional
and he fit the role he wasn't flashy as
Shcherbakov went upstairs to get settled
stout walked outside to wait in a parked
car with FBI agents he was back in the
lobby when the Russian reappeared he
came back down with a shopping bag and
we sat in the lobby in two armchairs we
exchanged car
mine said William G Stout decorative
arts specialist from the bag Shcherbakov
removed and carefully unwrapped several
Pollock objects a lot of faux pas lock
pieces are sold in Russia and stout was
taking no chances
I made him unpack them to be sure the
pieces were real he had a plate about
eight inches high with a hand-painted
floral design he also had an egg with a
portrait of Christ the egg was seven or
eight inches tall with flowers on the
reverse side he also brought out three
small boxes all had narrative images
from Russian folk stories and fairy
tales he said this was a sample of what
he could sell he asked me what would
sell well in New York he said he would
ship items in the future I told him if
what he brought was a good indication I
thought we could do business
successfully I said I would talk to my
clients show them the samples and we
would talk again while he was still in
New York
he completely believed me I gave him two
envelopes one was his per diem and the
other was payment for the Pollack about
$1,000 I think we were going to see each
other every day I said goodbye to the
Russian took the shopping bag
and walked out to the parked car I was
taken back to the FBI office in the
Federal Building near City Hall they
went over everything that had happened
in minut detail I left the palek pieces
with them I was thanked and given a ride
back to my apartment I never saw the
Russian again as far as Shcherbakov could
tell the man from the Frick had vanished
into thin air when he walked out of the
hotel lobby I was called back to the New
York field office about two weeks later
they thanked me and that was it
everybody was very happy
I played my role successfully Stout had
done exactly what the FBI had asked him
to do and did it well he returned to his
job at the Frick Collection and kept
secret his brief off-broadway acting
career the
FBI apparently adhering to a
need-to-know policy never revealed to
bill stout what a crucial role he had
played he was never told that he had
helped to crack one of the most
important espionage cases in the entire
history of American intelligence
