Chapter 4: The Spy in the Jaguar
youtube.com/watch?v=fgh4624--YE

Aldrich Ames known as Rick was born in
River Falls Wisconsin in May 1941 his
father Carlton was an academic who was
recruited into the CIA and moved to
Washington with his family after his
doctorate about Burma caught the
agency's attention Aldrich Ames was sent
to Burma in 1953 as a NOC an officer
with non-official cover during two years
in Rangoon his son Rick got his first
taste of a foreign environment back in
Washington Aldrich Ames got summer jobs
at CIA for three years then joined the
agency full-time as a clerk typist he
earned a bachelor's degree in history at
George Washington University completed
his training to become a spy and was
assigned to the Soviet division he
married Nancy Sega Barth a fellow spy in
1969 that same year Ames was assigned to
Ankara where his wife also worked for
the CIA under army cover after Ankara
Ames worked in counterintelligence in
the Soviet division at headquarters for
four years and was then sent to New York
City there he helped to handle a big
fish Arkady Shevchenko the
Undersecretary of the United Nations in
1975 after letting a contact to know
that he wanted to defect
Shevchenko was handed a note and told to
go to a bookstore near the UN CIA case
officer was waiting two years later
Eames took over as Shevchenko's handler
they drank a lot of vodka together in
1978 Shevchenko was summoned home never
a good sign
he insisted it was time to defect
carrying a suitcase in the rain he
walked down the fire stairs behind his
apartment building a CIA car whisked him
away to a new life in the u.s. three
years later Ames was assigned to Mexico
City
his wife had left the CIA had her own
career and did not go with him it was in
Mexico City that he met Rosario Casas
Dupuy a vivacious cultural attache at
the Colombian embassy she was recruited
as an access agent by the CIA mostly for
the use of her apartment for which she
was paid $200 a month she and Eames
dated and soon after his tour ended she
joined him in an apartment in Falls
Church in Northern Virginia after Eames
obtained a divorce they were married in
August 1985 in Mexico Eames had been
drinking heavily and the chief of
station recommended he have counseling
but back at headquarters he had only one
session with the counselor alcohol abuse
was not uncommon in the CIA and the
agency did not always regard it as a
serious problem ames faced financial
pressures from the divorce settlement a
new car loan a bank loan and mounting
credit card debts but in his new job as
chief of the CIA's Soviet
counterintelligence branch he had access
to a vast range of secrets that offered
a ready source of cash if he risked
selling them to the Soviets as part of
his duties in his new job
Ames began having meetings authorized by
the CIA with Soviet embassy officials in
Washington the hope was that he might
recruit a source inside the embassy in
December 1984 he started lunching with
Sergey chuvakin
an embassy officer on April 16 1985
after fortifying himself with several
drinks Ames walked into the Soviet
embassy and left a letter addressed to
stanislav Andreyevich andres off the KGB
rezident he provided his true identity
title and biographical details he
revealed his position as CIA chief of
the Soviet counterintelligence branch
that information alone was pure gold to
the KGB Ames asked for $50,000 a month
later he returned to the embassy and was
taken to a private
victor cherkashin the
counterintelligence chief entered and
handed him a note saying that the soviet
spy service had agreed to pay him the
money on june 13th 1985 ames wrapped up
almost seven pounds of secret documents
in plastic bags and walked out of the
CIA's headquarters in Langley Virginia
he was not searched he drove across the
Potomac River to Washington and walked
into Chadwicks restaurant in Georgetown
chuvakin was waiting ames handed him the
plastic bags crammed with documents that
revealed the Intelligence Agency's
deepest secrets the documents contained
in Ames his own words the identities of
virtually all Soviet agents of the CIA
and other American and foreign services
known to me ten of those were executed
for this and other secrets he passed to
the Russians for nine years Ames was
paid or promised 4.6 million dollars
that he had caused the death of ten
Soviets working for the CIA and the FBI
did not seem to bother Ames in the least
they were taking the same risks as he
did he said by the fall of 1985 the CIA
was in crisis one after another it
sources around the world were rolled up
and in time that ten sources were
executed including two who had been
recruited by the FBI
at first the CIA suspected a
communications breach it did not then
know the unpalatable truth that the
agency harbored a traitor in its ranks
in July 1986 Ames began a three-year
tour in Rome he continued to feed
secrets to the KGB stashing almost a
million dollars in two Swiss bank
accounts after he returned from Rome no
one seemed to notice that he drove into
CIA headquarters in a red xj6 Jaguar
everyday or that he now wore expensive
Italian suits and shoes but
October 1986 the CIA set up a small
highly secret mole hunt team headed by
Jean our vertefeuille a gray-haired
grandmotherly counterintelligence
officer whose unassuming appearance
concealed an acute analytical mind and
an extraordinary gift for remembering
details
she had never married the CIA was her
life she lived alone in a condo in
McClane so close to Langley headquarters
that she walked to work each day at
first glance she might have seemed an
unlikely choice to hunt down the most
dangerous mole in the history of the CIA
but there was hardly a KGB case she did
not know she could link old cases to new
ones that might crop up decades later in
a different part of the globe with KGB
operatives using different names for
years she had toiled inconspicuously in
the research section of the Soviet
division and the counterintelligence
staff she liked to work in quiet
obscurity she preferred the anonymity
that went with her job within the agency
there were some who compared her to john
lecarre as fictional Connie Sachs the
brilliant woman researcher who knew all
the Soviet cases and embodied the
institutional memory of the circus but
vertefeuille in excel
long a male-dominated hierarchy who
thought the job of finding the mole
might have deliberately been given to a
woman because the agency deep down did
not really want to find the traitor with
all the negative publicity that would
result by this egregious and flagrantly
sexist reasoning appointing vertefeuille
was a safe choice rather than naming a
man to head the unit they didn't want to
know one intelligence official said of
the agency's leaders if you find a mole
you have to deal with him it becomes
embarrassingly public uncovering the
mole would mean the CIA would become the
butt of cartoonists late night
television comics indignant newspaper
editorials and congressional calls for
investigations and
if the mole hunters did not succeed all
that could be avoided the CIA is a
bureaucracy and the work of the mole
hunt team went slowly a lead
investigator was pulled off and assigned
to other duties for months perhaps the
pace was slow because of the CIA's
unpleasant memory of a previous mole
hunt for 20 years from 1954 until 1974
James J angleton the chief of
counterintelligence had succeeded in
tying the agency in knots seeking a mole
it had begun in 1961 when a KGB officer
Anatoly galitsin defected in Helsinki he
warned the CIA that there was a
high-level mole inside the agency and
that later defectors would be sent to
discredit him
three years later Yuri no senko a second
KGB officer defected in Geneva angleton
put his faith in galitsin 'no Senco whom
angleton regarded as a dispatched agent
of the KGB was jailed and interrogated
by the CIA for more than four years
under horrible conditions most of the
time in a windowless concrete cell built
for him at the farm the agency's
training ground near Colonial
Williamsburg in Virginia he was drugged
17 times and sleep-deprived in the end
'no senko was rehabilitated and made a
consultant to the CIA a dispute over the
two defectors split the CIA apart
dozens of careers of loyal officers were
damaged by Angleton's dark suspicions
and the work of the Soviet division
ground to a halt three officers falsely
accused by Angleton's team because of
golitsyn's warning were eventually
compensated by Congress under a law
known sardonically inside the agency as
the mole Relief Act
finally Angleton was fired by CIA
director William e Colby who confessed
not to understand the CI Chiefs
convoluted theories of finding a mole
under every rock but that was
the past vertefeuille way and finally
late in 1992 sandy Grimes
a member of vertefeuille found a
correlation between bank deposits by
Ames and his meetings with chuvakin the
Russian embassy official she discovered
that right after their luncheons Ames
made cash deposits into his bank account
the mole hunters were hopeful that the
net was finally closing around Aldrich
Ames
but they were not certain he was the
traitor the hunt was complicated by the
fact that there were other suspects on
the CIA and FBI list despite the strong
circumstantial evidence more was needed
to arrest and prosecute Ames
