Chapter 21: I Have the File


(Part 2 of 2)
I have it sure birkoff replied I have
the file it was as though mr. PIM had
set off a bomb in the hotel room
Rochford was stunned the FBI agents
listening in the next room could hardly
believe their ears when scherbakov first
arrived in New York Rochford and his
team had hoped the former KGB man might
provide some leads to their sources
identity they never dreamed he might
have the moles actual KGB file
scherbakov was high enough in the KGB to
have access to the file
still it appeared that mr. PIM had
performed a feat that seemed impossible
on the face of it how could he have
walked out of the KGB carrying a large
file on the spy agency's most important
u.s. asset the answer he explained was
that he had removed the contents of the
file piecemeal over time he did not need
to remove the actual FBI documents that
the mole had given to the KGB instead
mr. PIM explained he had painstakingly
copied into a notebook the titles of all
the documents the source had provided
the FBI would not need the actual
documents because once it had the
material from the KGB file and his
notebook it could match the titles he
had copied with the original documents
in the FBI's files the file also
contained crucial physical evidence
which mr. PIM had taken but he was not
ready to talk about that yet also in the
file he had assembled was a detailed
record of all of the moles dead drops
the dates and locations scherbakov had
copied them as well into the notebook
that he smuggled out of the KGB the file
even contained drafts of letters that
scherbakov had written to the unknown
source
he wrote multiple drafts an FBI man said
to make sure that the tone was right
that they were not being arrogant or
ordering him what to do the KGB was
handling their spy with kid gloves
because he was in motion
extremely demanding and finicky about
how the Russians were running him why
did he steal the contents of the file I
don't know Rochford said I asked him
that a couple of times he said you never
know your life situation where you might
need some insurance I have to bring in
my partner from the CIA Rochford said he
declined to name him but other sources
familiar with the mr. PIM operation said
he was Leonard bellegarde Rochford 'he's
closest friend in the CIA they had
worked together on counterintelligence
cases for years bellegarde
a seasoned clandestine officer was
fluent in Russian and had served all
over the world in Mexico st. Petersburg
Geneva Sweden and Paris Rochford was
flying solo and wanted him in New York
for backup as the negotiation dragged on
it became increasingly clear to Rochford
that he would have to raise the ante for
his part mr. Pym realized he was not
going to get ten million dollars for the
file finally they settled on a payment
to scherbakov of seven million dollars
it was by far the largest amount ever
paid by American intelligence agencies
to a source alexander scherbakov had
made history
he was the 7 million dollar spy the
contract also provided all the other
guarantees mr. Pym demanded including
resettlement in the US and protection by
the CIA and the FBI as part of the
agreement mr. Pym stipulated that the
intelligence agencies in addition to
offering him safe haven also arranged to
bring out members of his extended family
not including his former wife but
Rochford was not about to promise him
millions of dollars for a pig in a poke
the FBI would have to see the file
before mr. Pym received the money the
Russian however would not agree to
return to Moscow to retrieve the file
without a
and up front now a new negotiation
opened between the FBI and the CIA the
two agencies
dickered over the size of the upfront
payment and who would provide it after
considerable back-and-forth it was
agreed that mr. Pym would receive a down
payment of seven hundred and fifty
thousand dollars
the CIA agreed to provide the money the
key was that he could take the seven
hundred and fifty thousand dollars and
pay off the Mafia Rochford said clearly
it was a big part of mr. Pimm's
incentive to make a deal
sure Birkhoff had squirreled away the
file for five years but only now was
willing to sell it like a lot of former
KGB men Aleksandr scherbakov tried his
hand at business but was unsuccessful he
was not the only X KGB officer to become
entangled with the Russian mob many
former spies cast adrift by the collapse
of the Soviet system and the country's
economic woes and desperate to make a
living turned to the criminal elements
in Russian society the former agents
after all had skills that were useful to
the Mafia so it was not surprising that
scherbakov services were engaged by the
Russian mob which had its tentacles
almost everywhere from money laundering
to extortion to ordinary business
activity soon he became involved with
the Irkutsk mafia and the caviar deal
that ended with the death threat for the
CIA and the FBI the large down payment
was a huge risk of course all Rochford
had was mr. Pimm's promises that he
could produce the KGB file on the mole
perhaps there was no file and scherbakov
simply planned to take the money and run
Rochford drew up the contract with mr.
Pym several times he broke off to
consult with his team of
counterintelligence agents next door
when it was done it was sent to FBI and
CIA headquarters for final approval we
faxed everything back to headquarters by
secure fax Rochford said washington
agreed to the terms
if mr. Pimm's file led to the capture of
the mole the FBI would pay half of the 7
million dollars
the CIA agreed after deducting the
upfront money to pay the other half
before mr. Pym headed back to Moscow
Rochford said we showed him the upfront
money we said it will be made safe for
you we would put it in the bank and set
up so you can get it as a business
account mr. Pym wanted to take the cash
with him we pointed out he could take it
but he would be caught trying to bring
it back into Russia scherbakov agreed to
leave the money in the bank account now
the 7 million dollar spy would have to
produce what he promised
