Chapter 25: The Voice of the Mole


(Part 2 of 2)
voice recording it was 14 years earlier
in 1986 that the unidentified mole had
given the KGB the number of a pay phone
in Northern Virginia that he arranged to
call at an agreed time on August 18th
unknown to the mole the KGB agent who
answered recorded part of their
conversation
now the FBI had the tape the Russians
had kept everything even one of the
plastic trash bags that the mole had
used to wrap the documents that he left
for the KGB in dead-drops
around Washington mr. Pym explained how
he came to possess the bag inside the
mystery package in addition to the tape
recording was an ordinary black plastic
trash bag of the kind that suburban home
owners used to dispose of leaves or
garbage when Hanson filled a dead drop
he would wrap the documents and disks in
a plastic trash bag and tape it up to
waterproof it and protect it from the
elements then he would wrap the whole
package in a second plastic bag under
normal procedure mr. Pym said someone
else opened the bags he would then
receive a pile of documents that had
been handled first by others only once
did they drop off the outer bag with the
documents he said when he removed the
outer bag he assumed that the only
person who had touched the inner bag was
himself and Ramon so he carefully put
the inner bag in an envelope the plastic
bag was to prove one of the two crucial
items in the file that scherbakov
removed from the KGB's first chief
Directorate it's foreign espionage arm
the other was the tape recording the bag
was sent to the FBI lab to check for
fingerprints but the bag would have to
be handled with extreme care and
processing it for prints was going to
take a while in the meantime Rochford
with two colleagues Michael wags pack
and timber Esme
turned to a room in the basement of the
FBI to listen to the tape
wags pack known as wags grew up in the
Cajun country near New Orleans and was
regarded as one of the best
counterintelligence agents in the FBI
berezne a was also an experienced
counterintelligence agent and a section
chief at FBI headquarters now at last
Rochefort was sure the fate of gray
deceiver Brian Kelly was sealed the FBI
counterintelligence agents were still
convinced that the CIA officer was the
mole as the FBI agents settled back to
listen they were sure they were about to
hear the voice of Brian Kelly the tape
rolled and the FBI agents could hardly
wait to hear it the long mole hunt was
about to be over to their utter
consternation the voice that boomed out
from the speakers was not that of Brian
Kelly the agents were stunned and
chagrined at the unexpected turn of
events
three years lost all that effort and now
just as Rochford was sure that the mole
was within his grasp the shocking
revelation on a 14 year-old snippet of
magnetic tape that the bureau had been
chasing the wrong man Brian Kelly was
innocent his career at the CIA had
suffered great damage that could not be
undone and repaired but if the voice on
the tape was not Brian Kelly then who
was it
wags pack recalled his frustration I
kept listening and I said I know that
voice the inflection I know that voice
but I can't put it with anybody that
voice sounds familiar we broke off that
day still unsure
