Chapter 1: The Stamp Collectors
youtube.com/watch?v=lRTgIpg0n3g

like any good spy story
it begins in Vienna a man calling
himself RINO geekman although that was
not his real name turned up in the
ancient Austrian capital on the Danube
in 1979 he described himself as a
computer salesman he was a big heavyset
gregarious man who sported a full beard
and mustache and he made friends easily
a few years after his arrival in Vienna
he was invited to join the offer artists
tom Tish the luncheon table at Kern's
Gasthaus on the volna Strasse there
Vienna's government bureaucrats and
business executives would meet each day
for a congenial midday meal heavy on
pork schnitzels beef and potatoes a few
beers and noisy sometimes table thumping
camaraderie he told them he was a Finn
and worked in computers for IBM he also
met Helga Hobart an intelligent
attractive dark-haired widow in her late
40s and moved in with her to her modest
gingerbread cottage in hietzing on
Vienna's western edge the house was
surrounded by a metal fence topped with
barbed wire and protected by a fierce
dog and a sign that read afflict cotrona
hunt dutiful dog the man who used the
name RINO geekman was not a computer
salesman and did not work for IBM he was
a Russian spy and illegal who arrived in
Austria with a false identity a legend
in KGB terminology because he was an
illegal he had no visible connection to
the Soviet embassy on the rise NIST raza
illegals operate without the diplomatic
protection afforded to spies operating
from the embassy intelligence officers
in the embassy have cover titles such as
first secretary the worst that can
happen to a spy with diplomatic
protection is if caught to be exposed
publicly declared persona non grata
and expelled from the country but an
illegal can be arrested imprisoned and
in some countries executed Hickman's
true mission in Vienna was to establish
contact for the foreign intelligence
service of the Soviet KGB with the
deputy chief of mission of the American
Embassy
the number-two US diplomat in Vienna who
ranked just below the Ambassador tall
polished and multilingual the deputy
chief of mission glided through the
endless round of receptions and
ceremonies of diplomatic life in the
Austrian capital with a confident air he
seemed almost born for his role he had
in fact been born in Vienna his name was
Felix Bloch in 1939 a year after the
Nazis marched into Austria his parents
who were Jewish got out with Felix then
four and his twin sister the family
settled in Manhattan where his father
prospered in the paper export business
Bloch and his sister were raised as
Presbyterians he joined the State
Department in 1958 as an intelligence
specialist a year later he married
Lucile Stevenson whom he had met in
Italy when they were both graduate
students in Bologna diplomatic postings
followed in Dusseldorf Caracas West and
East Berlin and Singapore in 1980 Bloch
was sent to his native Vienna where he
was in his element he and his wife had a
spacious house in Ober during one of
Vienna's best neighborhoods an opera and
art lover he collected the paintings of
Gustav Klimt like geekman Bloch had a
secret life
every Saturday block told his wife that
he had to catch up on work at the
American Embassy on the boltzman Gaza
but he did not go there instead he
visited Tina
Jero cick an attractive Czech born
prostitute specializing in S&M; games
featuring leather boots and whips her
services were expensive she said Blok
visited her nearly every Saturday
paid her $10,000 a year for seven years
according to an intelligence source at
some point geekman was seen by the
Austrian intelligence service entering
the back door of the Soviet embassy the
information was passed on to the CIA
which on further research concluded that
geekman was a Russian illegal he was
placed under surveillance
when geekman using the alias Pierre Bart
telephoned Bloch and arranged to meet
him in Paris both the CIA and the FBI
were alerted Bloch was a stamp collector
and the supposed purpose of the meeting
was to trade stamps the FBI thought
otherwise the secrets that crossed Bloks
desk as the second ranking US diplomat
in Vienna
if passed to the KGB could provide a
ready source of cash to pay Tina
jurrasic four blocks weekly visits the
FBI believed it would be problematic for
him to manage those payments on his
State Department salary but if Bloch was
a spy
the FBI lacked proof it hoped the
meeting in Paris might provide that
evidence the FBI contacted the direction
de la sousveillance du territoire DST
the French counterintelligence agency
when the two stamp collectors met the
FBI and the DST would be watching
