Chapter 20: Mr. Pim
youtube.com/watch?v=Q9S91XQ_Klk

Alexander Shcherbakov was now at least 
in a dialogue with Mike Rochford 
although so far he had
continued to reveal nothing at all about
an American mole working for Moscow to
protect his identity
the FBI gave him a codename Mr. Pim an
FBI analyst was credited with coming up
with the name inspired by Magnus Pym a
British spy double agent and world class
betrayer in john lecarre a's novel a
perfect spy gradually Rochford
established a rapport with Mr. Pim with
the benefit of mortal amour do the
volatile Russian began talking over
lunch and dinner about things that had
gone wrong in his personal life and his
career he had held senior jobs in the
KGB and its successor Foreign
Intelligence Agency the SVR he had been
deputy director of Directorate s which
trained and inserted illegals in the US
and other countries but he complained
bitterly about rampant corruption and
favoritism in the KGB alcoholics and
friends of KGB were the ones who got
promoted he grumbled Rochford would
light another cigar and just listen
letting the Russian unburden himself
what was clear Rochford said was that he
hated that the United States had
outspent Gorbachev in the Cold War and
that they lost he really believed theirs
was a better society invoking the motto
of the KGB Rochford countered you are
trying to protect the sword and shield
of a society that no longer exists
sometimes as they walked the streets of
Manhattan Mr. Pim ever the KGB man would
try to counter pitch Rochford he tried
to turn the tables on the FBI agent and
recruit him he pointed out attractive
women and expensive cars
if Rochford came to Russia he could have
a car like that Rochford said thanks
but he liked the car he had by now a
fuller picture of Alexander Shcherbakov
had emerged he was bitter at his former
service devastated at what had befallen
his country the collapse of the Soviet
Union and frustrated at what had
happened to him personally here he was a
former senior KGB official a deputy
director of an important Directorate no
less with many years of loyal service to
his country's premier Intelligence
Agency
now broke scrounging for business trying
to peddle painted boxes and reduced to
working for the Russian mob which was
threatening to kill him
when Shcherbakov arrived in New York
besides hoping to set up a business to
export artifacts he planned to try to
contact two shadowy Russians who were
involved in the caviar deal he hoped
they would pay him some of the money he
owed to the Mafia but Rochford
discouraged him from trying to contact
the pair whose names Mr. Pim disclosed
in the hope that the FBI might help him
find them you don't want to meet these
guys Rochford told him you're never
going to see the money
there was a reason that Rochford wanted
to steer Shcherbakov away from the two
Russians the FBI once it learned their
names had contacted the Immigration
Service and obtained the i-94 forms that
travelers coming to the u.s. have to
fill out the FBI discovered the two men
were already in trouble with the
authorities for other shady dealings
once we pulled the forms an FBI source
said we found they were already on the
docket in New York they were in the
court system any contact between Mr. Pim
and the two Russians could only
complicate Rockford's efforts although
he had wined and dined Shcherbakov and
they were getting along better
the ex-kgb men had not produced any
useful information in Rochford quest for
the mole and Rochford was getting heavy
pressure from his superiors in FBI
headquarters in washington to end his
efforts in New York
it was going nowhere they said his
quixotic 27 pitches to KGB agents had
produced zilch they reminded him he was
wasting time and FBI resources they said
during his stay in New York with Mr. Pim
he continually had to fend off sniping
from his colleagues at headquarters at
some risk to his career Rochford
rejected the demand that he break off
his meetings with Mr. Pim perhaps the
28th spy would be the charm
