Chapter 33: Jigsaw
youtube.com/watch?v=_uS0N61MRx0

Robert Hanssen was not a typical spy 
his life was a paradox a study 
in contradiction he was a jigsaw
puzzle in which none of the pieces fit
he was an FBI special agent an ardent
anti-communist who spied over a period
of twenty two years for America's
principled adversary the Soviet Union he
was a counter spy who was a spy he was
super religious a devout member of the
secretive and rigid Catholic
organization Opus Dei who took a
stripper to Hong Kong and concealed a
relationship with her from his family he
went to Mass almost daily but was a
dedicated pornographer who secretly
televised himself having sex with his
wife so his best friend could watch
Hanson knew the risks of his secret
multiple lives although he went to great
lengths to keep his identity hidden from
the KGB he knew that the flaw in every
spies armor was the danger that a spy on
the other side would betray him
that is exactly what eventually happened
when mr. Pym produced the file for the
FBI that led to Hansen's capture
aleksander sure birkhoff's motive was
easy to see after leaving the KGB he
struggled mightily to make a living but
was always and repeatedly unsuccessful
worst of all his latest venture
the failed caviar deal left him the
target of a death threat from the
Irkutsk mafia but the file was the key
to a new life with wealth beyond
imagination
more than enough to pay off the Mafia
and allow him to live ever afterward in
luxury and comfort
moreover providing the file to u.s.
intelligence would assure a lifetime of
protection for himself and his extended
family as dramatic as the story is of
how Hanson was finally captured and his
life of deception shattered and left
unanswered
the question of why
he chose to betray his country his
family his religion his colleagues the
FBI and ultimately himself he turned to
this writer as the path to provide if
indirectly the answers to why he chose
to spy against his own country Hanson's
attorney Plato kachoris had engaged a
psychiatrist dr. David L Charney to
evaluate Hansen
psychiatrist visited the spy in the
Alexandria jail more than 30 times over
many months in these sessions Hansen
unburdened himself to the psychiatrist
in detail about his life at the time I
was writing a book spy about Hansen that
was published in 2002 normally because
of doctor-patient privilege
Charney could not discuss his
conclusions or what Hansen had confided
to him but with encouragement from
Qataris Hansen allowed dr. Charney to
talk exclusively to the author about
their meetings he did so in a letter to
coach Aris with a copy to Charney
releasing the psychiatrist to discuss
his findings with me cachoeira said that
in freeing Charney to be interviewed
Hansen said David wise is the best
espionage writer around the psychiatrist
in Hansen met privately in a small vault
like room with white cinderblock walls
and a camera but no guards Hansen spoke
freely to dr. Charney about his
childhood his family his FBI career his
spying his religion and his motives for
betraying his country in those meetings
Charney learned more about Hansen's
background character and personal
history and his motives to spy than
anyone else in my own interviews with
dr. Charney he distilled and talked to
me about much of what he had learned
from Hansen several motives became clear
from Hansen's meetings with the
psychiatrist the defrocked FBI agent
said that in the beginning at least
money was
primary motive when he began spying for
the GRU in 1979 he had been transferred
to New York City an office that many FBI
agents shunned because of the high cost
of living
the Hansen's bought a modest house in
Scarsdale an expensive suburb but living
and raising a family there was a
challenge on an FBI salary the $30,000
he received from the GRU was only the
start of his spying career even though
he claimed he was obliged to turn the
money over to mother Teresa Hanson told
Charney that he had volunteered to the
Russians because of financial pressure
but Charney believed that Hansen's
desire to be the good provider for his
wife was the primary reason he wanted
the money in the 22 years that
on-and-off Hansen spied from Moscow he
sold the Russians 6,000 pages of
classified documents including some of
the nation's most sensitive secrets the
majority of the documents he stole came
from the CIA the NSA and the FBI in
return he was paid more than $600,000 in
cash and diamonds he was told that
another $800,000 had been deposited to
his account in a Moscow Bank the six
hundred thousand dollars he received
amounted to far less than the 2.7
million the Russians paid to Aldrich
Ames ironically it was also a lot less
than the seven million dollars that the
FBI and the CIA jointly paid to mr. Pym
for the file that unmasked Hansen the
KGB man turned a much better profit than
the mole he betrayed the money was spent
in a variety of ways he remodeled his
house in Virginia for $70,000 sent six
kids to private school and four to
college he collected an armory of guns
and all kinds of computers and related
gadget REE he spent some $80,000 on
Priscilla su Gailey the stripper
including a sapphire and diamond
necklace
a used Mercedes and the trip to Hong
Kong but it was also clear from what
Hanson told Charney that his sense that
he was always an outsider in the FBI was
in addition to the money an important
factor in his decision to commit
espionage bob was always seen as a
computer guy a weenie a number cruncher
said David major he was never a field
agent operating against the Russians
because he was not detailed to more
glamorous counterintelligence work
Hanson may have decided to create his
own Soviet operation
he told Charney that he came to think of
himself as an outsider a nerd although
he did not cite that as the reason he
became a Soviet spy he did spend a lot
of time talking about his father Howard
Hanson a retired Chicago cop who by all
accounts was a mean notably unpleasant
man who lost no opportunity to belittle
his only son and sometimes harmed him
physically as well his hope was that his
son would become a doctor but with
grades too low he settled instead for
dental school and hated it rather than a
career as a dentist Robert Hansen joined
the Chicago Police Force has had his
father before him
Charney saw a direct link between
Hanson's anger at his abusive father and
his betrayal of the FBI any organization
can be like a family he said how the FBI
treated Hanson as an outsider may have
disappointed him a second time leading
to deep resentment only once did his
father do anything that could be seen as
an effort to bond with the son he
continually disparaged when Robert
Hansen enrolled in the police force his
father who had retired three months
earlier sent him his gun Hanson's
miserable relationship with his father
was certainly not the only factor that
may have contributed to his becoming a
spy his fascination with James
and and his desire for excitement were
important as well he said he was bored
before he started spying Charney related
the spying produced excitement and made
him come alive the risk is part of the
excitement
although Hansen was regarded by his
fellow FBI agents as a computer nerd in
his own mind he could at times
apparently transmute into agent
double-oh-seven a beautiful woman was
part of that fantasy and he was
especially attracted to the sultry Welsh
actress Catherine zeta-jones ranma
low-tech who became a friend of hanson
when they worked together at the State
Department said Hansen talked a lot
about the actress in the movie
entrapment about a bank heist in which
she starred with Sean Connery who was
the first actor to portray James Bond on
film she was wearing tight fitting body
suits in the movie he said she looked
really hot he saw the movie five times
in my family we called him Machine Gun
Bob
Milotic added because he had one in his
car trunk with 400 rounds of ammunition
he showed it off to his friend one day
he opened the trunk and there was this
armory the machine gun was a bureau gun
he had checked out and a nine-millimeter
pistol he said I could drive my car into
the Potomac River and come out shooting
the ammunition was in waterproof bags
these were all indicators of someone
longing for the supposed thrills of a
real-life spy Hanson's task in working
with the FBI analysts was to try to
figure out how the Russians were
stealing US secrets it volunteered his
services to Moscow so his own role was
no mystery but he was immensely curious
about how the KGB went about recruiting
others and what techniques they used to
penetrate sensitive intelligence
agencies Charney concluded that hanson
spied at least partly because of that
curiosity he wanted to know how did the
KGB actually operate how would you ever
know that if you did not get
involved with them if curiosity impelled
him to cross the line into espionage it
also created a dilemma
once he spied he was trapped inside a
secret world of his own making from
which there was no easy exit Paul Moore
a former FBI analyst explained it this
way he's getting money he can't spend
very well and he's getting satisfaction
he can't share with anyone in the
letters you see him forming a
relationship with the Russians the only
people he can share his success with are
the people on the other side for Hanson
however there was the reward of living
an inside-joke Hansen exalted in his
inside knowledge Charney said he could
regard himself as the puppet master
knowing more than anyone within the
bureau David major agreed bob would get
a sublime high by being the ultimate
inside joke everybody is trying to
uncover a spy and he's at the meeting
where they are discussing it and he's
the spy the outsider had at last become
the insider but only he knew it
