Chapter 6: Nightmover 
youtube.com/watch?v=UpTgj2eKaBY

In May 1993 the FBI opened the case
on Aldrich Ames headquarters assigned 
the investigation to Robert Bear Bryant 
a lawyer from Little Rock Arkansas 
who was head of the Washington
field office Bryant in turn handed the
day-to-day supervision of the case to
John Lewis an ex-marine and
counterintelligence agent for 22 years
who was second in command of the field
office with the collapse of the Soviet
Union two years earlier the KGB's
Foreign Intelligence arm had changed its
name to the SVR it made little
difference in its operations and Lewis
knew its methods well he had started
working KGB cases in 1976 at
headquarters later for two years as
counterintelligence director in the
White House and then to Vienna for the
FBI on detail to the CIA Louis made a
key and inspired decision to run the
Ames investigation he chose special
agent Leslie G Weiser jr. 38a former
Navy lawyer from level green
Pennsylvania a Pittsburgh suburb he had
been both a military defense counsel and
a prosecutor while stationed at the
Navy's submarine base at New London
Connecticut Weiser joined the FBI in
1983 when he left the Navy he worked in
foreign counterintelligence for seven
years tall and lanky with gray hair and
a matching mustache Weiser did not fit
the stereotype of the laconic grim-faced
FBI agent familiar from movies and
television he smiled a lot and could
laugh at himself but he was also
exceptionally quick and decisive a
consummate counter spy Weiser led a
squad of seven special agents plus two
wire men in charge of electronic
surveillance two agents in charge of
physical surveillance and an evidence
specialist the investigation was closely
held and members of the squad were
carefully scrutinized before they were
assigned
we polygraphed all our own people before
they got involved in this case john
lewis said we didn't want any leaks from
the bureau wiser was also concerned
about leaks at the FBI field office then
located at buzzards Point a remote
industrial area on the Anacostia River
in southwest Washington the operation
was tightly held it was very secret
Weiser said people in the next room did
not know what we were doing when they
asked we said we were working on The X
Files a popular TV program we joked and
then they stopped asking the FBI gave
Eames and the case the codename night
mover Weiser's first task was to place
Ames under surveillance to do so Weiser
called in the Gees FBI parlance for the
SSG the special surveillance group the
Gees are a surveillance team selected to
look like ordinary citizens bearded
bikers white-haired grannies with
shopping bags a young mother with a baby
in a stroller college students out
jogging street repair crews and yellow
hard hats young lovers kissing in the
park all might be G's on the job
the Gees are civil servants not FBI
agents and earn lower pay than the
agents all are trained in surveillance
photography and communications they are
chosen precisely because they do not
resemble the public's concept of FBI
agents about 50 members of the SSG were
assigned to the Ames case under Weiser
John Lewis recalled some of the problems
Weiser faced it was tough to set up
surveillance in a residential
neighborhood where Ames lived Lewis said
strangers are noticed we told the Gees
cover him like a glove but don't get
made if there is a remote chance he will
identify you abort more than once our
people were spotted there was a report
to the police about strangers in the
neighborhood but we didn't want to go to
the local police
although
Ames was leaving signals for the svr
filling dead-drops
hiding places with more secrets and
picking up cash but the FBI to avoid
alerting Ames kept its distance the fact
that Ames was trained in
counter-surveillance made it more
difficult for the agents to catch him in
the act of filling or clearing a drop in
addition to the Gees watching Ames his
home telephones were tapped with
approval from the Foreign Intelligence
Surveillance Court the shadowy secretive
wiretap court in the Capitol the FBI
wanted to place a James Bond type
transmitter in the Jaguar so that Ames
could be tracked but the problem was how
to gain access to his car Weiser had a
plan Ames was now working in the CIA's
counter-narcotics Center Weiser invited
him and his boss David Edgar to a
meeting at FBI headquarters
supposedly to discuss a project Ames was
working on to develop cooperation among
countries in the Black Sea area to
curtail the opium crop but Weiser had to
be sure that Ames drove his own car to
FBI headquarters Edgar was in on the
scheme and said to Ames I can't use my
car it's being repaired we'll have to
use yours
so Ames drove his Jaguar into FBI
headquarters and parked next to the
cobblestoned courtyard in the center of
the building
he took an elevator upstairs to the
meeting as soon as the doors to the
elevator closed an FBI agent drove the
car into the FBI garage using a set of
keys he had made a few days earlier the
meeting lasted half a day ample time to
install the beacon in the car then the
Jaguar was returned where Ames had left
it in August less Weiser ordered a trash
cover on Ames's house in Arlington
Virginia
FBI jargon for going through a suspects
garbage he did not need approval from
the Attorney General or the special
Surveillance Court because once a person
puts trash out on a public street for
pickup it is fair game but how
get at the trash without Eames
suspecting anything John Lewis recalled
the difficulties we discovered he was a
restless sleeper he would get up at 2:00
or 3:00 in the morning and look out in
the street Weiser devised a plan and
turned to the Gees special search and
response team the FBI obtained a trash
barrel on wheels identical to all the
others provided to homeowners in the
area the barrel would be placed in a van
as the van reached the Ames house in the
dead of night two men would jump out and
switch barrels Weiser had the team
perform practice drills until he was
satisfied that the switch could be done
in seconds noiselessly the trash would
then be taken to a location nearby
examined and anything of interest
removed then Weiser discovered a
potential flaw in the plan arlington
trash cans had individual serial numbers
ames might notice if his trash barrel
had suddenly changed numbers during the
night Ames's trashcan would have to be
returned to his house well before dawn
but only a few weeks later Bryant told
Weiser to call off the trash brigade
there was concern his antenna might be
up Weiser recalled Weiser had no choice
he brought the nocturnal trash operation
to a halt on September 9th
Ames left his house unusually early just
after 6:00 a.m. through a mix up the
Gees arrived half an hour late and
missed him then at 4:00 p.m.
Ames left the CIA early the FBI
surveillance cars were waiting outside
the gates at Langley Ames in his red
Jaguar zoomed on to the George
Washington Parkway Ames just takes off
like a bat out of hell
there Bryant recalled and we lose him
although the FBI had planted the beacon
in Ames as Jaguar it signals could only
be picked up if the bureau's trailing
car was reasonably close behind and the
beacon was not as powerful as the FBI
had hoped Weiser was getting
considerable heat
the FBI brass they were distressed that
Ames had gone operational and eluded
surveillance twice in a single day
Weiser decided to reinstitute the trash
cover
despite Brian's order to stop it I took
the view that he had merely suspended
the trash cover Weiser said so I
unsuspended it it was a gamble and might
endanger his career because if he came
up empty-handed again with nothing but
banana peels and coffee grounds Bryant
might not appreciate Weiser's
interpretation of his orders Weiser
decided to wait until Ames left for
Ankara on a trip for the
counter-narcotics Center on Monday
September 13th two days later in the
pre-dawn hours of September 15th a black
van it's lights off glided slowly past
Ames's house just as they had practiced
in their trash drills two men jumped out
and silently switched the barrels the
van moved on moments later the FBI got
its first major break in the case
they removed from Ames's trash a torn
yellow post-it note it said I am ready
to meet at B on 1 October
I cannot read North 13 to 19 September
if you will meet at b1 October please
signal North week of 20 September to
confirm no message at pipe if you cannot
meet 1 October signal north after 27
September with message at pipe
translated the note which the FBI
laboratory determined was in Ames's
handwriting meant that he was ready to
meet the SVR in Bogota on October 1st
but would be unable to read signal sight
north during the middle of September the
reason was that Ames would be attending
the counter-narcotics meeting in Turkey
that week he asked that the Russians
confirmed the Bogota date by leaving a
signal at North a telephone pole near
Ames's house
after he returned from Turkey or by
leaving a message in pipe a dead drop in
a drainpipe in Wheaton Regional Park in
Maryland if the Bogota meeting was
canceled the FBI concluded that the note
it had recovered from the trash was a
first draft because it also found a
small piece of a second draft Ames had
put the final version in a dead drop on
the afternoon of September 9th when he
went racing out of Langley eluding the
FBI when the post-it note was found by
the trash team Weiser was called at his
home before dawn he showered shaved and
got into the office a little before 6:00
a.m. he was elated when he read the note
this was it when we got this we knew we
had a spy Weiser said and that he was
active Weiser was waiting outside
Brian's office smiling broadly when his
boss arrived Weiser looked like the
Halloween pumpkin Brian said I mean he
was so happy it was unbelievable Weiser
savored the moment I walked in and said
we've solved it I showed him the note he
asked me where I got it so I told him
and there was a little discussion about
it
Bryant after all had ordered Weiser to
halt the trash cover all was quickly
forgiven it was said Bryant a marvelous
piece of insubordination in October with
court approval FBI agents secretly
entered Ames's home and planted bugs his
telephones had been tapped for four
months but only heard phone
conversations now tiny transmitters were
hidden throughout the house to listen to
voice conversations the agents also
downloaded his computer they found CIA
files and messages to the SVR our james
Woolsey the CIA director notified the
White House that a spy had been found
inside the agency President Clinton's
national security advisor Anthony Lake
told the president the bad news the
wiretap made clear that
Rosario Ames was well aware of his
spying and even advised and nagged him
about his tradecraft more than once she
complained and worried that his
espionage was sloppy on a trip to Bogota
when he lost a suitcase containing cash
the Russians had paid him she advised
him
perhaps you should use a carry-on he
said he would next time
Eames meanwhile appeared blissfully
unaware that his spying had been
detected he sent a message to the SVR
assuring the Russian service all is well
with me
I have no indication that anything is
wrong or suspected on February 22nd 1994
Ames was scheduled to travel to Moscow
to confer with officials on
counter-narcotics he would be on the
home turf of the SVR the very
intelligence service that had paid him
millions of dollars over nine years the
FBI did not think that was a very good
idea if Ames had picked up any whiff of
trouble he might not bother to come back
the trip was delayed three times FBI
officials and prosecutors met with John
Lewis and Paul Redmond a top CIA
counterintelligence official Lewis was
adamant that Ames could not be allowed
to get on the plane to Moscow
Redmond agreed once the decision was
made Ames had to be arrested before he
left
On February 21st Weiser and an assistant
US attorney presented an arrest warrant
to a US Magistrate in Virginia
David Edgar called Ames at home and
summoned him to the office Ames did not
expect to be there long he had to get
back and finish packing nine miles away
in Alexandria Weiser pulled away from
the federal courthouse in an FBI radio
car we got the warrant
he said Ames stepped into his Jaguar and
pulled out of his driveway a block and a
half from his house he came to a stop
sign the car ahead of him had stopped at
the sign but oddly it had not started up
again alongside it was another car
apparently wait
to turn left the street was completely
blocked Ames waited impatiently for the
car ahead to move suddenly two more cars
with flashing red lights appeared behind
him the Jaguar was boxed in three FBI
special agents approached the car one
del Spri held out his credentials FBI
you're under arrest
he told Ames get out of the car Ames in
a state of total shock sat frozen behind
the steering wheel agent Mike Donner
repeated the order get out of the car
there must be some mistake Ames said
lapsing into b-movie dialogue he
repeated there must be some mistake a
few times then the door of the Jaguar
opened slowly Ames got out moving like a
man in a slow motion video you're under
arrest for violating u.s. espionage
statutes del Spri said it was 10:30 a.m.
half a dozen other armed FBI agents
surrounded the CIA man Ames spread his
hands wide a look of incredulity on his
face
espionage me he asked I hear what you're
saying but you've got to be kidding as
Ames stood against the Jaguar del spry
put the handcuffs on behind his back
Ames was placed in one of the FBI cars
he was driven to the FBI's Northern
Virginia field office in nearby Tyson's
Corner less Weiser's car had only gone
50 feet from the courthouse in
Alexandria when his radio crackled the
suspect is secure a voice informed him
at the same moment an army of FBI agents
had silently surrounded the Ames's five
hundred and forty thousand dollar house
on North Randolph Street upstairs in the
bathroom Rosario Ames was putting on her
makeup their five-year-old son Paul was
also in the house Rosario's mother
Cecilia visiting from Bogota was asleep
in the guest room the doorbell rang and
the housekeeper answer
it Rosario was surprised she wasn't
expecting anyone
Rosario went downstairs the visitors a
man and a woman identified themselves as
special agents of the FBI and asked her
to step outside they told her that her
husband had just been arrested for
espionage and that she was also under
arrest for espionage they had asked her
to step out of the house so that her son
would not see her being arrested they
told her she could go back inside and
tell her mother and get her coat
Rosario ran upstairs woke her mother and
told her that she and Rick had been
arrested by the FBI
Paul was waiting in the hall when
Rosario came back downstairs she grabbed
a camel's hair coat and hugged and
kissed her son I have to go with these
people she said but don't worry I'll be
back soon
outside she realized the house was
surrounded there were FBI cars
everywhere and agents with
walkie-talkies in the front yard and on
the street she too was put in an FBI car
as wiser approach to the Ames's house in
Arlington a second message came over the
radio suspect 2 is in custody in the FBI
car taking Ames to the field office
Eames repeated to himself almost like a
mantra think think think in the car
Eames two could listen to the FBI's
communications he heard a report come
over the radio we've secured the house
Ames knew that all kinds of
incriminating documents computer disks
and letters were in the house and in his
computer containing details of much of
his nine years of spying for the KGB
now they had him and Rosario and the
evidence it was all over slouched in the
FBI car Aldrich Ames veteran a 31 years
in the CIA Secret Millionaire and up to
then Moscow's most valuable mole in the
history of the Cold War
uh turd only two words oh
many of Ames's victims were the most
important ever to spy for US
intelligence most disquieting of all for
the CIA was the betrayal of General
Dmitri Fedorovich Poliakoff he was first
recruited by the FBI which gave him the
codename
top hat he had returned to Moscow in
1980 after spying for the United States
for 18 years and was living out his
retirement peacefully with his family
during his long career he had provided
the names of four Americans who were
spying for the Kremlin and a mass of
critical military information including
data on Soviet strategic missiles other
than Oleg Penkovsky whose information
helped the u.s. during the Cuban Missile
Crisis Polyakov was considered the most
valuable and highest-ranking spy in the
agency's history because of Ames he was
executed but there were many other
valuable assets including Adolf
tolkachev the defense researcher and
expert on stealth aircraft technology
although the majority of the KGB sources
Ames gave to the Russians worked for the
CIA two had been recruited by the FBI
from inside the Russian embassy in
Washington they were lieutenant colonel
Valeri F Martinez and major Sergei M
Motorin that worried Ames because there
was always a chance however remote they
would hear some whisper inside the
embassy that would expose his identity
that risk was much too close for comfort
which is why Ames made sure that both
their names were on the list he handed
to Tuvok eeen at Chadwicks I began to
fear the possibility of detection he
said later I began to see it as useful
or protective of me to compromise those
cases so they wouldn't be in a position
to hear something I didn't assume they
would ever become knowledgeable but
accidents happen martino of and motoring
could be a potential threat those who
were serving overseas when Ames betrayed
them were
back to Moscow by various stratagems
martino of was assigned to escort your
chenko back to moscow when the defector
changed his mind and went home
Martine off never returned to Washington
motor ins tour was up normally so he too
went back to Moscow
both men were executed Leonid poleshchuk
a senior KGB counterintelligence officer
in Nigeria was persuaded to return to
Moscow with a KGB fiction that a
desirable apartment had been found for
him other victims of Ames were lured
home from Indonesia Portugal Hungary and
Germany all were killed after Ames's
arrest play toca Charis the celebrated
Washington defense attorney was selected
as his court-appointed lawyer Qataris
had a rock-solid reputation for
integrity he also earned hundreds of
dollars an hour keeping wealthy clients
out of jail representing Ames paid $60
an hour but it was also the sort of
high-profile case that lawyers found it
hard to resist the CIA was anxious to
question Ames about what exactly he had
passed to the Russians Qataris was able
to work out a plea bargain with
prosecutors
if Ames cooperated fully with the CIA
and the FBI he would be sentenced to
life and Rosario to five years at the
time there was no death penalty for
espionage both pleaded guilty on April
28th 1994 the first debriefing of Ames
took place in the FBI's office in
Tyson's Corner the day after the
sentencing Ames revealed how frightened
he was when the KGB swiftly rolled up
all the people he had betrayed in 1985
he had expected the Soviets would act
cautiously and slowly allowing plenty of
time between arrests that way he hoped
the CIA would be misled and attribute
its losses to various reasons other than
the work of a single source who had
provided all the names at one time but
the KGB's Rapid Action was likely to
trigger a mole hunt in the sea
I a that could point to him when he told
the KGB in Rome how scared he was by the
precipitous arrests in Moscow the
Soviets had asked is there anyone else
we can blame the KGB was suggesting in
other words that aims frame another CIA
officer as the soviet mole ames looked
at Jeanne vertefeuille
said across the table from him you're
not going to like this
he said but I gave them your name it was
an electric moment the debriefers could
hardly believe it Ames had falsely
provided the KGB the identity of the
CIA's chief mole hunter to try to
deflect attention from his own guilt on
June 2nd
I interviewed Ames in the Alexandria
City Detention Center
accompanied by Plato coach Aris I took
the elevator to the third floor and
entered a tiny windowless room with
their white cinderblock walls a small
round table and chairs the heavy door
slammed behind me and locked
there was a small round table and chairs
no windows
opposite the door I had entered was
another door with a small glass panel at
chest height leading to the cell blocks
I waited and in a few moments I saw him
through the glass a uniformed guard
unlocked the door and Ames entered the
guard left Ames was wearing a khaki
shirt with the word prisoner on the back
and dark pants he was tall with broad
shoulders a mustache and thick glasses
we sat down at the little table casseras
handed Ames some interview requests and
other correspondence that he had brought
and some yellow pads his client had
requested Ames took a moment to shuffle
through the papers in Congress Lee he
looked for all the world like a business
executive opening a meeting he was
friendly at first
upbeat almost cheerful it was only a
little more than a month since his
sentencing and it was apparent that he
had not yet felt the
impact of the bleak future that awaited
him the debriefings had begun and as he
talked it was clear that he was enjoying
the interaction with his old colleagues
from the CIA and the FBI they were
treating him like a professional as long
as he kept talking and revealing new
details of his spying the other day they
brought in a couple of actual members of
the surveillance team he said they were
very excited to finally get a chance to
meet their target Ames smiled as though
he savored all this he had to be careful
he said not to reveal any classified
information to me rosaria's sentence
depended upon his compliance with the
plea agreement which barred him from
disclosing more secrets about either the
CIA or his spying for the KGB he
expected she would get five years he
said he was very bitter about his wife's
sentence because she did nothing I said
I understood he wanted to protect his
wife
but the FBI wiretaps were part of the
public record and the excerpts that had
been released showed that his wife had
coached him to be careful and
participated in his activities his eyes
turned to ice I thought he might break
off the interview but he did not
shifting to other subjects I asked him
how he had acquired the KGB codename
khaliqul which means Bell in Russian he
chose it himself he said because it was
the name of a weekly journal published
by Alexander Hudson the 19th century
Russian revolutionary writer who was
exiled in Paris and later in England the
journal was banned in Russia but widely
read Ames became quite animated in
talking about Harrison and the roots of
his KGB codename the interview was
winding down and Qataris pushed a buzzer
to summon a guard early in our
conversation I mentioned that I had met
his former boss if Gainey Primakov the
head of the SVR in Moscow a few years
earlier when I was researching an
article for the New York Times Magazine
Eames asked me what I thought of prima
coffee Eames listened intently
seemed hungry for news of the svr then
the guard arrived we shook hands and
Eames was taken away the heavy door
slammed behind him with a loud metallic
clang when the debriefings ended Eames
was transferred to the maximum-security
wing of the federal prison at Allenwood
Pennsylvania to begin his life sentence
Rosario Ames after serving her own
prison time returned to Bogota with
their son and so the spy had been caught
convicted and sent to prison for life
the drama was over the problem of the
mold inside US intelligence had been
solved or so it seemed
but the counterintelligence
establishment within the government knew
better there was a major problem and his
name was Felix Bloch
