Chapter 3: The Counterspy
youtube.com/watch?v=lT62ErXzCeM

In addition to Aldrich Ames and
Colin Thompson Michael Rochford
a veteran FBI counterintelligence agent
had interrogated Yurchenko at the safe
house in Virginia Rochford was intrigued
by one of the Russians disclosures
Yurchenko told us that the KGB decided
they did not have enough sources in the
u.s. Rochford recalled they had a
high-level meeting and said we will go
out and offer a million dollars each to
people in the FBI and CIA to come to us
then your chenko Reid affected for two
years we were stunned
the FBI realized the KGB program could
be turned around and used against the
Russians we decided our best chance was
to take the KGB's idea and get a list
together Rochford said an FBI team was
assembled to draw up the names to be
approached they came up with a list of
250 Russians who were American targets
officers Rochford said these were KGB
and GRU military intelligence officers
who were active or retired but whose
careers were so illustrious that they
would have worked American targets and
offer them a stack of money so that we
would be able to identify all
penetrations in the US intelligence
community the CIA had its own list and
we then joined with the agency and we
said let's get a group of people who
would try to tap people on the shoulder
go anyplace in the world you have to and
see if you can talk to them and offer a
million dollars the FBI gave the program
the codename buck'll or later it was
called Pennywise there were no takers
there was a time in the Soviet Union
when people were terrified of their own
service Rochford said terrified they had
even met with us some would walk away
others would listen and laugh and report
it back but others would hear you out
and not report it back another former
FBI agent said some of the Russians
contacted were
offered a deal we would say you give us
the name of the penetration and we will
pay you a million dollars you don't have
to defect and this will only be known by
the President of the United States and
the two of us the money approach had
been tried before in 1982 the FBI had
famously approached Dmitri I yaku scan
the KGB raised the nth the top Soviet
spy in Washington at the Georgetown
Safeway yokujin was about to return home
to Moscow after seven years the FBI knew
this and decided to approach him to see
if he could be persuaded to defect a
cold pitch as it is known to a KGB
rezident one as experienced as Yakushi
Caen had almost zero chance of success
a young Special Agent Dayle H Pugh
approached the KGB man who was in the
produce section carefully feeling the
oranges for any soft spots
yoku skin made a striking figure he was
six foot four about 220 pounds and wore
a beret which made him look like a cross
between an artist in Monmouth and an NFL
linebacker urbane and well-educated
fluent in English he came from a
prominent Russian family the FBI man
tried to persuade Yakushi keen to meet
him away from the supermarket so they
could talk privately
but the KGB agent declined finally Pugh
following instructions from his squad
supervisor offered the Russian millions
to defect to the United States young man
yakusan said I appreciate the offer 20
years ago I might have been interested
and with that he walked away
Yakub skin appeared more amused than
offended by the encounter but there was
an unspoken subtext to the dialogue by
the orange bin at the Georgetown Safeway
yoku skin had a girlfriend from North
Carolina the entire time he was in the
US as he probably suspected she was an
FBI source but the bureau hoped she
might be in incent
for him to defect and remain in the US
the FBI even asked her to give Yakushi
on a copy of Graham Greene's novel the
honorary consul in the hope that it
might persuade him to stay the novel
said in a provincial town in the north
of Argentina has the usual array of
expatriate tormented green characters
Charlie Fortnum the British honorary
consul is 61 a drunk and marries a 20
year old prostitute when he is kidnapped
by leftist revolutionaries who mistake
him for the American ambassador the
British government does not even
consider him worth the ransom after he
is rescued by police
London rewards his years of service by
dismissing him the bureau may have
thought that the theme of an older man
in love with a younger woman living in a
foreign country and unappreciated by his
government might resonate with yakusan
it didn't the KGB man went home as
scheduled and rose to become head of the
American Department of the spy agency's
first chief Directorate it's foreign
intelligence arm Michel Rochford began
his search for the mole in 1987 born in
Chicago in 1955 Rochford grew up on the
tough south side in a typical Irish
Catholic working-class neighborhood his
father had been a police officer for
almost three decades at age 19 he joined
the FBI he went to Southeastern
University in Washington played
basketball at night and worked full-time
at the bureau a year later the FBI sent
him to language school in Monterrey to
learn Russian back in Washington he
completed college at American University
and graduated with an accounting degree
from the start
Rochford was assigned as a counter spy
working against the KGB's line KR
counterintelligence agents in the
capital his first target was Victor I
chair caution the KGB's canny chief of
counterintelligence in Washington
much later Rochford learned that it was
chair cushion who had personally
handled aims a counterintelligence chief
did not risk sending a cable to Moscow
about the high-value CIA spy who had
walked into his web he bypassed channels
and flew to Moscow to hand the
incredible good news directly to
Vladimir cry off the head of the KGB's
first chief Directorate but Rochford
knew that chair caution would be a prime
catch if he accepted the FBI's money ice
talked chair caution around the world
Rochford said in the beginning he was
not on the top of the list retired
generals chiefs of director @k the
counterintelligence arm at KGB
headquarters were at the top of the list
terr cautions daughter married the son
of a retired american army officer and
shekharan came to monterey for the
wedding and i was there sir caution was
too wily a professional spy to end his
career with a million-dollar bribe he
returned to the soviet union and rose to
become head of the American Department
of the spy agency's first chief
Directorate and eventually retired to
his dacha near Moscow Rochford was
pulled off the mole hunt and sent to
Nashville where he developed a taste for
country music but finding whoever was
selling us secrets to Moscow was never
far from his thoughts when he could he
was determined to resume the chase
