Chapter 31: Crime Scene
youtube.com/watch?v=JVrBjmGteyg

it was getting past 6 o'clock
and Bob had not returned
home for dinner bonnie was growing
increasingly worried she waited a while
then served dinner to her daughter
son-in-law and their young children
still no sign of Bob she tried his cell
phone but it wasn't turned on a call was
placed to the FBI to see if they knew
where Hanson was no the word came back
they had no information then the
trimmers left bonny telephoned her
mother in Chicago pray for Bob she said
something strange is going on he hasn't
come home
Bonnie feared there might have been a
medical emergency or an accident he
might be lying in a hospital somewhere
unable to contact her she was becoming
frantic it was well after dark now and
Bob had still not returned from the
airport nor had he called what was
keeping him Bonnie could stand it no
longer she got in her car and drove out
to Dulles to look for him the FBI
followed her to the airport in the
parking lot the Gees approached Bonnie
they told her that her husband was
unharmed but agents would arrive in a
moment to explain the agents appeared
and escorted Bonnie to a room inside the
terminal
there she was told that her husband had
been arrested for espionage she was
destroyed an FBI man said she was
devastated from the airport
the agents drove Bonnie weeping and
overcome back to her house they stayed
with her as she made a series of
telephone calls to family members to
tell them what had happened she called
her mother again and told her the
dreadful news Bonnie's sister Jeanne
Begley's and her husband George arrived
from across the street to do what they
could although the FBI agents were
polite they weren't about to leave the
house was a crime scene and it would
have to be thoroughly searched the
bureau had obtained search warrants two
days earlier
Special Agent Dave Lambert was already
going through the house with Greg Hanson
the couple's 17 year old son Lambert
asked where Hanson's guns were Greg knew
exactly where they were leading the FBI
man to the location of each firearm in
closets under beds seemingly all over
the house
the only other Hanson child still living
at home Lisa then 15 returned from a
date with her boyfriend and stepped into
the Maelstrom when told that her father
had been arrested as a spy she broke
down sobbing Jean Begley's cradled Lisa
in her arms
the FBI agents alerted Boni that soon
the house on talisman Drive would become
the center of a media frenzy with yellow
tape stretched across the lawn
television satellite trucks clogging the
street and reporters swarming the
neighborhood they offered to take her
and the two children to a hotel to
escape the chaos she accepted and went
upstairs to throw some clothes together
the agents escorted her and the children
to the nearby Residence Inn at Tysons
Corner at the house and again in more
detail at the hotel Bonney volunteered
startling new information
until then the FBI's counter spies
believed that Hanson had begun spying in
October 1985 that was the date on the
first letter from Hanson to the Soviets
in the file that mr. Pym had stolen from
the KGB for the first time the FBI now
learned from Bonnie that Hanson had in
fact begun his espionage career in 1979
in New York she related how she had
surprised him in the basement of their
home in Scarsdale writing a letter which
he had hastily tried to conceal he
admitted to her that he had received
thousands of dollars from the Soviets
selling FBI secrets to them he claimed
he had been scamming the Russians
providing worthless information which as
the FBI later found out was a lie
she had in
did he see father butcher le the Opus
Dei priest who had first advised Hansen
to turn himself in but then changed his
mind and said he could instead
contribute the money to a worthy church
cause bonny said that Hansen later
contended he had given the money thirty
thousand dollars to mother Teresa it was
only months later after Hansen had
pleaded guilty and was being debriefed
that the bureau learned from him that in
1979 far from selling worthless
information he had betrayed to the GRU
the identity of top hat General Dmitri
Fedorovich Polyakov one of the most
important US agents inside the Soviet
military top hat was executed after he
was also betrayed in 1985 by the CIA's
Aldrich Ames and it was only when Hansen
was debriefed that the FBI also learned
why the KGB's file from mr. PIM
contained no evidence of his earlier
spying the reason was that in 1979
Hansen had volunteered his information
not to the KGB but to the rival GRU the
military intelligence service at the
residents in bonny continued to talk and
respond to questions until almost dawn
the agents seemed satisfied with her
answers the FBI appeared persuaded that
she had really believed her husband's
promises that after his first venture in
1979 he would never spy again she was
clearly distraught and shocked by his
arrest now it was early Monday February
19th and the public still knew nothing
of the arrests of yet another super mole
this time not within the CIA like
Aldrich Ames but inside the FBI itself
and to make matters even more
humiliating the spy was not only in the
FBI he was a counterintelligence agent
in the National Security Division the
very part of the Bureau responsible for
catching spies
the FBI braced for the storm that was
sure to come
the FBI retrieved the package that
Hanson had left under the footbridge in
Fox Stone Park moments before he was
arrested they substituted another
containing only blank paper
the agents kept the drop site in Fox
stone park under surveillance hoping to
catch an SVR officer in the act of
retrieving the package that Hanson had
left under the footbridge nabbing a
Russian officer in the act would if only
a little offset the bad news still to
come about Hanson but no Russian showed
up Sunday night or the next day on
Monday night the FBI continued to keep
the drop site under surveillance again
no one appeared the FBI was not sure why
the Russians had not cleared the drop it
may have been related to a mix-up at
another drop site for a week
FBI agents had been lying in the woods
in the cold in the rain at the Long
Branch Nature Center nine miles from Fox
Stone Park watching the amphitheater
that was dead-dropped Lewis where the
SVR had left $50,000 for Hanson the FBI
concluded that the money had been left
at the Lewis drop site as a result of a
breakdown in communication between the
SVR and Hanson normally Hanson and the
Russians exchanged documents and money
at the same drop site weather may have
been partly to blame
when the Russians placed the $50,000 at
Louis they put a piece of tape on a poll
Gallagher said it rained the tape
shriveled up and fell off the pole we
found it about two feet away
two hours after Hanson's arrest agents
also picked up the money at the Nature
Center Hanson would not be needing it
word of the sensational arrests could
not be held indefinitely and on Tuesday
February 20th FBI director Louis Freeh
scheduled an afternoon press conference
to announce the big news
he was too late I had learned from a
source the previous day of Hansen's
capture and shared the dramatic
intelligence that night with a good
friend at NBC News at 7:00 a.m. Tuesday
I appeared on NBC's Today Show as it
broke the story of Robert Hansen's arrest
