Chapter 24: Trouble in Moscow
youtube.com/watch?v=7UI7OcydsRY

a month went by and the news from the CIA's
Moscow station was not at all good Mr. Pim
had failed to show up for the August
4th meeting Rochford was concerned but
tried to comfort himself by thinking of
several possible explanations perhaps
there had been a missed signal Rochford
knew how difficult it was to operate
inside the Russian capital under the
noses of the FSB perhaps the CIA officer
was unable to dry clean himself
satisfactorily and had aborted their
scheduled meeting perhaps scherbakov a
trained counterintelligence officer had
broken off contact if he believed he may
have spotted surveillance near the CIA
man as the officer neared the site for
the handoff or sure Birkhoff may have
gotten cold feet he was taking a huge
risk if something went wrong he would be
arrested and imprisoned if not worse he
had access to his big upfront payment
which had been deposited in a business
account had he decided to take the money
and flee not for the first time the
thought crossed Rockford's mind that
perhaps there never was a file and it
was all a scam if so Rochford knew he
had better prepared to look for work in
the private sector his future as an FBI
counter spy was on the line his concern
turned to intense alarm when Mr. Pim
failed to show for the September 4th
backup meeting clearly the operation was
in big trouble Rochford managed to send
word to scherbakov come back We Need to
Talk
in late September Mr. Pim arrived in New
York again to be met by a relieved Mike
Rochford at least the Russian had not
disappeared at the same time Rochford
was both worried and angry Alex he asked
what the hell happened mr. Pibb
was evasive but as Rochford listened to
his excuses he concluded that he had
been hiding from the Irkutsk mafia the
whole time facing a death threat he
apparently holed up in his apartment for
almost three months fearing to set foot
outside it was the only explanation that
made sense but it meant that the
operation to find the mole had now been
unexpectedly derailed by the Russian mob
it was a bizarre twist and threatened to
destroy Rockford's years of patient work
if Mr. Pim failed to show for the
handoff a third time the naysayers at
FBI headquarters would have a field day
at Rockford's expense the stakes were
made clear to Mr. Pim the sooner he
passed the file to the CIA and Moscow
the sooner he could return to the u.s.
collect the rest of his seven million
and remain in the US for good once
safely back on American soil the CIA and
FBI would protect him from both the
Irkutsk killers and the SVR Mr. Pim
agreed to return to Moscow and he
promised to hand over the file on
November 4th
