Chapter 12: Double Betrayal 
youtube.com/watch?v=RQlORIcZLMk

Robert Hanssen joined the FBI in 1976 and was
assigned to the New York field office
three years later although for most of
his career he spied for the KGB he began
his espionage for the GRU the Soviet
military intelligence agency in 1979
later claiming he needed money for his
growing family he volunteered his
services to the GRU and betrayed one of
the most exceptionally valuable Russian
spies working for the US Dmitri
Fedorovich Polyakov whose FBI code name
was top hat at the time Polyakov had
been passing secrets to the US for 17
years he was considered by Washington as
an agent of supreme importance six years
later after his identity was
additionally confirmed by Aldrich Ames
Polyakov was executed Hansen had a
chilling reason for betraying top-hat he
wanted to turn in Poliakoff to the GRU
before the Russian might learn his
identity and reveal it to the FBI he was
certainly aware that his information
would surely result in polyakov's
execution that was the whole point
the first espionage venture by Hansen
might have gone undiscovered but for the
fact that his wife Bonnie startled him
writing a letter in the basement of
their suburban home in Scarsdale
he tried hastily to conceal the letter
and his wife suspecting he might be
having an affair confronted him Oh No
Hansen assured her it was nothing like
that
he was just selling secrets to the
Soviets he admitted the Russians had
paid him $30,000 alarmed and upset Boni
insisted they see a priest Hansen and
his wife were members of Opus Dei a
somewhat mysterious and severe Roman
Catholic religious organization that
emphasized prayer and spirituality in
the daily lives of their members the
priest Robert P Buchi le Rick
that the FBI man turned himself in to
the authorities the next day however
father Bob said that he had been
pondering the problem and had second
thoughts the matter could be resolved he
told them if Hanson instead of
surrendering to the authorities gave the
money to a worthy church charity Hanson
thought that was a much better solution
he promised his wife that he would not
sell secrets to the Russians again he
also told Bonnie later that he paid a
certain amount each month to mother
Teresa
although Hanson attended Mass almost
every day and was regarded as super
religious there was a dark and twisted
side to his psyche that was unknown to
his family and his FBI colleagues in
1998 he posted sexual fantasies about
his wife on the Internet the theme of
most of these was other men seeing his
wife naked in one such posting when they
lived in Chicago near the elevated
railway Bonnie in Hanson's imagination
was naked and fixing her hair in their
apartment when suddenly he fantasized
she sees a group of men track workers
staring at her through the window at
first bonnie tries to pull the shade but
it keeps rolling up exposing her cute
little bush in another of Hanson's
internet inventions at a party in their
apartment bonnie becomes groggy when she
has a few drinks and puffs on a joint
she strips in the bedroom and he orders
her to stay that way as two male guests
wander in and see her then Hanson enters
the bedroom bonnie was there lying
completely nude on her bed with her
held open her legs splayed wide
just as I had told her she was a good
obedient wife but Hanson's internet
fictions moved into shocking reality
when Jack hot shower his closest friend
visited their home in Virginia in the
1980s they had met at Taft High School
in Chicago's Norwood Park Jack
considered himself closer to
Hanson than a brother he had been best
man at Bob and Bonnie Hanson's wedding
he was so close that he telephoned
Hanson every day without fail from
wherever he was the Hanson children
called him uncle Jack in high school
they shared an interest in Formula One
racing and girls as adults both were
avid surfers of internet porn sites
hache our lived in Germany where he
spent five years as an army attache in
Bonn when Jack served in Vietnam
Hanson sent him pictures of Bonnie naked
in the 1980s whenever Jack visited
Hanson and stayed at his home in
Northern Virginia
they often secretly slipped away to
visit strip clubs it was at the house
that Hanson proposed that Jack watch him
and his wife having sex and so at night
ha shower stepped out through the French
doors onto the deck we're standing on a
chair he was able to look through the
bedroom window and watched the Hansons
having sex since the deck backed onto
the woods there was little chance that
anyone would see him standing there in
the dark it was not enough for Hanson to
allow his close friend to watch the most
intimate private moments between a
husband and wife he also later felt
compelled to write about it on the
Internet he Jack could see her walking
around the room naked and I'd position
her in different ways on the bed while
her so he'd get a good look of
my going in and out or of her tits
bouncing Hanson was exposing the FBI's
secrets and at the same time exposing
his wife he betrayed his country and
simultaneously betrayed his wife and all
the while he was confessing his sexual
sins and his espionage to his priests
piously observing the rules and rites of
Opus Dei and urging his friends to get
closer to God Hanson decided Jack might
get chilly standing in the night air so
he hid a small video camera in his
bedroom
so that Jack
in the comfort of the downstairs den
could watch on television as Bob and
Bonnie had sex in the upstairs bedroom
the video sex show went on over a period
of about three years the den was cozy
there was a fireplace a comfortable
chair and the television told by Hanson
on what nights to watch hot shower would
tune in to his own special
closed-circuit Channel
Bonnie Hanson knew nothing of this
according to her shower he never asked
to view the sex show I never initiated
it
I was always invited to watch and
sometimes I didn't want to I didn't
think it was right but he wanted me to
do it so bad he paused and added I've
got no excuse ha shower could have said
no but he never did he never told his
friend to stop
