chapter 18: I'll Have a Lobster 


Aleksandr shcherbakov left the hotel and strolled
down the Avenue enjoying the early
summer weather in New York and feeling
pretty good about himself the meeting
could not have gone better he had
finally established himself in the
export business and from what was said
at the meeting he had every reason to
expect customers in New York the very
center of US commerce he had not walked
very far however when he was approached
by a stranger who were you scherbakov
asked in reply the stranger pulled out
his business card it identified him as
Mike Rochford Federal Bureau of
Investigation I said how are you
Rochford recounted I knew you many years
ago it was a lie I never met him before
in my life Rochford said but counter
spies are not clergymen for many years
of framed quotation from eric ambler
decorated the office wall of James gear
the director of the FBI's Intelligence
Division it read in part I think if I
were asked to single out one specific
group of men one category as being the
most suspicious inhuman sadistic
double-crossing set of bastards in any
language I would say without hesitation
the people who run counter espionage
departments scherbakov was deflated but
Rochford pressed on let's go have a
drink he said I don't drink with
strangers the Russian replied ok
Rochford said you have a glass of water
I'll have a beer they walked back to
scherbakov hotel in the lobby scherbakov
demanded how do I know you are who you
say you are in reply Rochford pulled out
his official credential sure Birkhoff
got angry it was finally beginning to
dawn on him that he'd been lured to New
York and ensnared in a
counterintelligence operation you
ruined my business opportunity he
protested you set me up I'm going to the
security officer of the Russian mission
to the UN and you're going to wake up
tomorrow and you will be on the front
page of the New York Times don't flatter
yourself Rochford retorted you'll be
lucky to get in a comic strip in The
Washington Times scherbakov was furious
he's swearing at me in Russian Rochford
said and doesn't know I speak Russian
Rochford tried to calm the Russian down
I said I just want to help the US and
the result will make you the richest
businessman in Russia that seemed to get
the Russians attention I have to be here
for another couple of weeks Rochford
said he knew that his target wasn't
going anywhere the plane ticket that was
sent to scherbakov had a return date two
weeks later it was 11:30 a.m. the
Russian didn't drink anything Rochford
was finishing a beer only two people
know I'm here
Rochford assured him only the director
of the CIA and the director of the FBI
scherbakov said you probably
have a whole team of people here he was
right a large contingent of top counter
spies as well as technical specialists
had accompanied Rochford to New York
they included Carolyn Gwen fuller
Deborah Evan Smith Jim Milburn the
Soviet analysts dan Cloyd and les Weiser
who found the post-it note that ended
Aldrich Ames as spying career you're
probably recording everything scherbakov
said I said I'm not recording anything
that was true for the moment Rochford
had booked a hotel not far from the
Benjamin as his headquarters the FBI
techs were set up in the room next to
his and ready to secretly record
everything if at some point scherbakov
could be persuaded to meet in
Rochefort's room Rochford asked the
Russian if he had any money he said he
didn't I'll take you to dinner tonight
Rochford said will it be paid for by
your director scherbakov asked Rochford
said yes good scherbakov said i'll have
a lobster
