Chapter 9: He Was at the Center of the Hourglass 
youtube.com/watch?v=46GZ4dob3Tw

at the start of 2000 the
search for the second mole was not going
well the Brian Kelly investigation had
stalled as well it should since he was
innocent but there were unresolved
mysteries still knowing at the counter
spies about cases aside from the warning
to felix bloch that pointed to another
mole ames had insisted he turned over
all the CIA FBI and foreign intelligence
sources he knew about On June 13 1985
but three assets working for the CIA and
mi6 British intelligence had been
summoned to Moscow before that date
Leonid poleshchuk the KGB's deputy
resident for counterintelligence in
Lagos Nigeria had been working for the
CIA since he was first recruited in
Nepal in 1974 he had been lured home
apparently in April 1985 when the KGB
floated a bogus story to him that an
apartment in Moscow always extremely
difficult to find had become available
police Chuuk wanted to give an apartment
to his son
Andrei a journalist after the KGB man
returned from Lagos he was arrested and
executed Oleg Gordievsky was the KGB
resident in London on May 17 1985 he
received a cable ordering him to report
to Moscow urgently for high-level talks
Gordievsky knew he was in mortal danger
he had been at headquarters in Moscow
only four months earlier with no hint of
trouble cold fear started to run down my
back Gordievsky told me because I knew
it was a death sentence still he could
not be certain that the KGB had
discovered he was spying for the British
Secret Service with the knowledge of the
CIA if he refused the order to return
home he would be dismissed and lose his
high-level post in the KGB
Gordievsky gambled and flew to Moscow it
was the wrong choice he was confronted
accused as a spy and drugged the British
had provided him with an escape plan if
he was ever in trouble he signaled mi6
which was able to exfiltrate him smuggle
him to safety over the border to Finland
inside a hidden compartment in a Land
Rover and on to Britain
Colonel Sergei bokken was the deputy
resident in Athens of the GRU the Soviet
military intelligence arm as the deputy
Bo Khan knew all of the gr use spy
operations aimed at Greece the United
States and the other NATO countries on
May 17 1985 he received a cable saying
that his son Alex was in trouble in
military school and urging that he taken
early vacation to deal with the problem
bo Khan whose boyhood nickname was mole
knew it was not true
and a death trap only a few days earlier
he had called his brother-in-law in Kiev
where Alex was in school and was assured
that his son was doing well and his
grades were fine as soon as he could
leave the embassy he telephoned an
emergency number for his CIA contact
painfully he bad his wife and a 10 year
old daughter goodbye and said he was
going for a jog not knowing whether he
would ever see them again
a CIA plane was waiting for him after
dark and he was on his way out of Athens
to Andrews Air Force Base in Maryland
six years later he was finally reunited
with his family in the u.s. these 3 1985
cases strongly suggested that there was
a mole inside US intelligence but they
were not conclusive Ames
later confessed that polishchuk Bokan
and Gordievsky were among the names he
turned over to the KGB the problem for
the counter spies was that the three
fell under suspicion before Ames said he
turned over their names to the KGB
On June 13th 1985 but Ames could have
been mistaken about the date or lying as
a result the strongest evidence for a
second mole remained the KGB's warning
to felix bloch that he was under an FBI
investigation someone had told the KGB
about the investigation and the KGB had
in turn warned block so the mole hunt
continued in 1994 after the arrest of
ames michael Rochford had been moved
from FBI headquarters to the Washington
field office where he became head of the
special squad attempting to find the
penetration of US intelligence agencies
Ames did not know about the block
investigation so he could not have
warned the KGB about the FBI
investigation there had to be someone
else for the next six years Rochford
continued plugging away in operation
Pennywise approaching dozens of SVR and
former KGB officers dangling a million
dollars to any who might provide clues
to the identity of the mole he also
travelled to London a dozen times to
interview Vasily meet Rokan a KGB
archivist who in 1972 began copying
sensitive files at first on scraps of
paper that he hid in his shoes he buried
his notes and documents under the
floorboard of his country dacha in 1992
he delivered his trove to British
intelligence which spirited him his
archive and his family to Britain Metro
Caen was able to provide leads to
thousands of KGB agents and operations
all over the world several u.s. spies
were caught and sent to prison as a
result of information in me trocken
archive they made the mistake of
boasting about their spying for the
Russians when they were contacted by
Dmitry drew gents key a multilingual FBI
agent who successfully impersonated a
KGB officer during his extraordinary
almost 30-year career but none of the
data in Metro qian's are
I've led to the identity of the second
mole burrowed inside US intelligence to
find out the truth was the job of the
FBI's intelligence division its agents
were responsible for arresting spies
infiltrating foreign intelligence
services and recruiting their agents to
work for the FBI the division was
divided into sections one of these
housed the Soviet analytical unit the
research arm of the bureau's spy
catchers perhaps the division chiefs
reasoned something might be learned if
the analysts looking back to the
beginning of the Cold War studied every
report from a recruitment or a defector
that hinted at possible penetrations of
the FBI by Soviet intelligence just
possibly it was hoped a pattern could be
divined that might point to a current
penetration if one existed within the
Soviet unit two experienced analysts Bob
King and Jim Milburn were assigned to
read the debriefings of Soviet defectors
and reports of Soviet intelligence
sources who had over the years been
recruited as spies by the FBI
James P Milburn was not a name known
outside of the closed world of
intelligence but he was greatly
respected within the FBI for his
knowledge of Soviet intelligence and his
analytical skills if the bureau had a
complex problem involving the KGB it
would usually turn to Milburn he also
spent time working on KGB problems at
the CIA red-haired and freckled
powerfully-built and about six feet tall
Milburn liked to play basketball on his
lunch hour in the Bureau gym he would
get into games with guys from records
and fingerprinting Paul Moore a former
FBI China analyst said he's a
30-something going up against these
young guys from the ident division he
got injured a lot bad injuries doing
that sort of stuff Robert H King was a
veteran foreign counterintelligence FCI
analyst
he had an exceptional memory for details
and a singular ability to connect
seemingly unrelated events King had come
to the bureau from the CIA a relatively
unusual career path that led to some
good-natured needling in the FBI I used
to accuse him of being a CIA penetration
of the FBI more said in his previous
work at the CIA King had also been a
Soviet analyst the FBI analysts as one
colleague explained are looking for
anomalies possible penetrations anywhere
in the government they have read all the
defector debriefings they might see
something and say well this is strange
isn't it a typical anomaly would be
normally it takes a certain amount of
time to go from lieutenant to major in
the KGB why was this Soviet promoted
early was anybody else promoted who
worked in the Washington residency at a
certain time period
maybe a bunch of medals were passed out
if the FBI learned KGB people got medals
it was often for handling an American
source another tip-off more broadly the
whole Soviet analytical unit was looking
for penetrations the people in the unit
were specialized some might look at line
ex-kgb efforts to gather S&T; Science and
Technology material some specialized in
illegals and so on the two analysts
working on the mole study shared a
cubicle in room 48 35 at FBI
headquarters with their supervisor the
supervisor at all 44 year old man was
not a popular figure among his fellow
special agents although known for his
skill with computers
he was somber and unsociable his
nickname in the bureau was dr. doom he
had been born in Chicago served for a
while as a police officer in that city
and had joined the FBI in 1976
now he was responsible for preparing and
overseeing the mole study for the
supervisor directing the analysis to
help discover a possible mole was a task
of it
exquisite irony for he knew who had
turned over the names of the FBI sources
Valeri Martin off and Sergey Motorin to
the KGB he knew there was in fact an
active mole inside the FBI passing the
bureau's most highly classified secrets
to Moscow he knew the spy was a trusted
counterintelligence agent at FBI
headquarters he knew in fact that the
spy was a supervisory special agent
inside the Soviet analytical unit
he knew all this but could tell no one
and for good reason Robert Hanssen was
looking for himself the two analysts
assigned to the mole study and Hanson as
its supervisor had the advantage over
the others in the unit most analysts
looked at specific targets such as the
various KGB lines and did not know much
outside their own specialized areas Paul
Moore explained but a few people did
all-source and that was Milburn King and
Hanson within the Soviet analytical unit
Hanson in other words was one of the
very few entitled to know all the FBI's
sources and secrets or as David major a
veteran former FBI and White House
counterintelligence official put it he
was at the center of the hourglass he
saw everything and gave it all to the
Russians Robert Hansen had been spying
for the Russians for years but had so
far been undetected by either the FBI or
the CIA when the study was complete it
was approved by Hansen and classified
top secret he wrapped it up and left it
at a dead drop for the KGB the drop
which the KGB designated Park was under
a wooden foot bridge near the entrance
to Nodaway Park a location convenient to
his home in Vienna in Northern Virginia
the volatile critical nature of its
contents was protected by a stern
warning on the first page
in view of the extreme sensitivity of
this document the utmost caution must be
exercised in its handling the contents
include a comprehensive review of
sensitive source allegations and
investigations of penetration of the FBI
by the Soviet intelligence services the
disclosure of which would compromise
highly sensitive counterintelligence
operations and methods access should be
limited to a strict need-to-know basis
the study was so highly classified
because if leaked it could endanger the
lives of Soviets who were helping the
FBI the study identified the sources who
had hinted at moles in the bureau and
exactly what each had said Moscow could
now enjoy the product of this intensive
secret effort by the FBI's Soviet
analytical unit in exchange the KGB gave
Hansen $25,000 in cash and asked for
data on several topics including FBI
surveillance techniques and recruitment
operations the exchange was typical of
the method used by Hansen to conceal his
identity he would turn over secrets
either documents or computer disks in
dead-drops and get paid in exchange in
dead drops he wrote letters to the KGB
but was careful to give no hint of who
he was or in what agency he worked to
signal that a drop was ready to be
cleared Hansen would leave a chalk mark
on a mailbox or a tape on a telephone
pole or a park sign his hope was that by
never disclosing his name he would
protect himself from a source in the KGB
who might betray him
betrayal is at the very core of
espionage but it works both ways no
matter how careful a spy might be
someone on the other side might bring
about his downfall
Hansen knew that and worried about it
eventually he wrote in one letter to the
KGB
I would appreciate an escape plan
nothing lasts forever
