Chapter 2: Yurchenko's Come Over 
youtube.com/watch?v=4KOJCikhkIo

Rome august 1st 1985 Vitaly Yurchenko a
senior KGB official had recently arrived
on a counterintelligence mission his
supposed purpose was to assess whether a
u.s. Navy enlisted man was a genuine spy
for the Russians for almost two years
Thomas Hayden a Master Chief at the US
Naval communication center in Naples had
been selling us secrets to the KGB who
told him he was being groomed to replace
John Walker as Moscow spy inside the
United States Navy but Tom Hayden was a
loyal American a double agent on a
high-risk assignment for the Navy
posing as a traitor three days earlier
Yurchenko dressed in red swim trunks a
white cap and a white polo shirt met
with Hayden on a beach south of Rome
there are too many people here Yurchenko
said he led the way instead to a
secluded area in the woods behind the
beach there the KGB man and another
agent plied Hayden with Czech beer as
Yurchenko questioned him closely Hayden
was sweating he could not tell whether
the Russian was on to him or not to
Vitaly Yurchenko perhaps it didn't
matter the meeting with Hayden was a
pretext so your chinko could travel to
Rome
on the morning of August 1st he told his
colleagues at the Soviet embassy that he
was going to take a walk and visit the
Vatican Museum instead he slipped into a
pay phone across the street from the
American Embassy on the Via Veneto and
telephoned a CIA officer Yurchenko asked
to defect he was told to come into the
embassy immediately the Rome CIA station
cabled headquarters in Langley Virginia
across the Potomac from Washington the
word spread quickly among CIA and FBI
counterintelligence officials who were
gathered there for a luncheon you're
Cheng COEs come over
for the CIA Yurchenko was the walk-in of
a lifetime the highest ranking KGB
officer ever to defect in the entire
history of the Cold War the official in
charge of the KGB's operations against
the United States and Canada the KGB
closed down on October 24th 1991 two
months before the Soviet Union itself
came to an end the KGB had been divided
into two parts the first chief
Directorate the spies conducted foreign
intelligence the second chief
Directorate ran internal security and
counterintelligence bo3 emerged with
only the names changed as components of
the Russian Federation the spies were
renamed the SVR the foreign intelligence
service the FSB the Federal Security
Service took over Internal Security
counterintelligence and anti-terrorism
to keep matters simple in this book in
most instances the spies are generally
referred to by the familiar initials KGB
and only occasionally as the SVR even in
describing events after 1991 the man who
entered the American Embassy that
midsummer morning had clear blue eyes
thinning red hair and a drooping
handlebar mustache he had the big frame
and broad shoulders of an athlete he
spoke good although heavily accented
English for five years he had been
security officer of the Soviet embassy
in Washington the first question always
asked of a KGB defector was whether he
knew of any Soviet penetrations inside
the CIA or US intelligence Yurchenko
knew of too he was flown to Andrews Air
Force Base where the CIA officer
assigned to meet and take charge of
debriefing him was of all people Aldrich
Ames the chief of the Soviet
counterintelligence branch it was a
frightening moment for Ames who four
months earlier had begun spying for the
Russians
he must have feared that Yurchenko would
walk off
the plane point his finger at aims and
say there he is but there was no
confrontation on the tarmac Yurchenko
did not recognize aims whisked back to a
safe house in northern virginia by the
CIA Yurchenko provided information that
led the FBI to Edward Lee Howard a
former CIA officer about to be sent to
Moscow in 1983 when he failed a
polygraph test and was fired angered at
the agency he sold secrets to the KGB
and escaped from Santa Fe to Moscow
using a pop up dummy to replace him when
he jumped from the passenger seat of the
car driven by his wife a trick he had
learned in his CIA training to reach
Moscow he used his TWA getaway card
Howard put the money he received from
the Russians in a secret Swiss bank
account containing upwards of one
hundred and fifty thousand dollars he
buried an additional ten thousand
dollars in the New Mexico desert he was
granted asylum in the Soviet Union the
Russians said he died there in 2002
after he broke his neck in a fall in the
dacha near Moscow that the KGB had
provided to him the CIA blamed Howard
for betraying the identity of Adolf
tolkachev a Soviet defense researcher
and expert on stealth aircraft
technology
later Ames also betrayed tolkachev
sealing his fate he was tried by a
military tribunal convicted of high
treason and executed Yurchenko said
there was another mole inside US
intelligence he did not remember his
name but said the man had telephoned the
Soviet embassy in January 1980 and
offered to sell secrets of the National
Security Agency the nation's
super-secret code and electronic
eavesdropping agency at the time
Yurchenko was stationed in Washington as
the KGB officer in charge of security
for the Soviet embassy Yurchenko had
taken the call and suggested the caller
come to the embassy
FBI agents watching the embassy had no
way of knowing who the man
was inside the embassy the walk-in as
volunteer spies are known revealed
sensational information the NSA had by
using submarines been able to tap into a
Soviet underwater communications cable
in the Sea of Okhotsk between the Soviet
mainland and the Kamchatka Peninsula the
United States was listening in to Soviet
military communications the highly
sensitive project had been codenamed Ivy
bells the NSA visitor offered to reveal
more but demanded payment in gold
bullion in a scene straight out of a
Marx Brothers movie Yurchenko at first
thought the man was referring to chicken
soup the confusion was soon cleared up
but in the meantime a Soviet electronics
technician rushed into the room he had
picked up a burst of radioactivity from
the FBI's walkie talkies and radio cars
the Soviets ordered the American to
shave his beard and change into Soviet
work clothes
he was slipped out a side door
surrounded by several Russian workmen
the group got into a van and drove away
dropping the NSA man off when they were
out of sight of the embassy the FBI was
unable to identify the mysterious
visitor but it began a massive hunt for
him the FBI reviewed the tapes of phone
calls to the Soviet embassy and located
the January 1980 conversation it began
playing the tape for NSA employees
hoping someone might recognize the voice
finally after 10 months one of them said
that's Ron Pelton arrested Pelton
confessed his spying was convicted at a
trial and sentenced to life in prison a
principled reason your chenko defected
was that he pined for the woman he had
known when he worked as security officer
at the Soviet embassy in Washington in
the late 1970s he hoped to rekindle
their romance valentina Yaroslavsky was
a doctor married to a Soviet diplomat
they were stationed now in Montreal your
chenko pleaded with the CIA to see her
again Colin Thompson a CIA officer who
had participated in debriefing Yurchenko
waited in Montreal as other agency
security officers took the defector to
the border Canadian intelligence
officers escorted him to Montreal and
watched her apartment until her husband
left for a luncheon meeting your chenko
telephone Yaroslavsky and she hung up
the Canadians took him up to her
apartment she let him in briefly but
tearfully rejected his pleas to resume
their relationship Yurchenko was crushed
and increasingly despondent three months
after he arrived at Andrews Air Force
Base Yurchenko walked away from his
young CIA minder in a Georgetown
restaurant made his way to the new
Soviet embassy of the hill in Washington
Andrey defected to Moscow
