Chapter 11: The Diamond Connection 
youtube.com/watch?v=zKE-fVxyi9k

the FBI had very few clues to follow in its
search for the mole but one was
tantalizing we had heard from a defector
that somebody was being paid in diamonds
John F Lewis who had headed the FBI's
National Security Division said there
was a diamond connection the information
was given the codename carat the
defector did not know who had received
the gems or even where he worked the
source was often vague as to which
agency the mole was in Lewis said
sometimes it was the bureau sometimes
the CIA but the tip turned out to be
true Hansen wrote to the KGB in 1985
that he did not need a lot of money
perhaps some diamonds as security to my
children in September 1988 the KGB
obliged along with a personal letter of
thanks from Vladimir a Khrushchev the
KGB chairman Hansen fished out a diamond
worth twenty four thousand seven hundred
and twenty dollars from under a bridge
in idle wood park in Northern Virginia a
few months later he had received a
second diamond valued at seventeen
thousand seven hundred and forty eight
dollars for Hansen diamonds had the
virtue of being small and therefore
easily concealed the cash that kept
rolling in from Moscow was getting to be
bulky and more difficult to hide
especially in a house that he shared
with a wife and six children in the
spring of 1989 Hansen turned over a
computer disk and more than 500 pages of
documents in return the KGB left him a
package with 18 thousand dollars in cash
and a third diamond worth eleven
thousand seven hundred dollars by now he
had received diamonds valued at a total
of fifty four thousand one hundred and
sixty eight dollars and the KGB began to
fret about whether Hansen was concealing
the gems or flashing them around the
Russians asked what security
he was taking to avoid suspicions about
the diamonds Hansen told the KGB not to
worry if anyone asked he would say the
diamonds came from his grandmother but
Hansen himself had misgivings and
decided the diamonds were risky and that
cash was more practical in May 1989 he
returned the first and third diamond
valued at a total of 36 thousand four
hundred and twenty dollars and asked for
cash instead which he received the
following Christmas Day although
diamonds would be difficult to explain
if discovered the large quantities of
cash flowing in were also a problem to
deposit the money in banks or invest in
the market was risky since it would
leave a paper trail of unexplained and
unreported income so when he returned
the two diamonds for cash he included a
floppy disk on which he suggested that
the KGB might set up a bank account in
Switzerland for him and transfer bonds
into it the traditional secrecy of Swiss
banking laws Hansen believed would mask
the source of the funds as well as the
identity of the account holder but the
KGB turned down Hansen's idea of
establishing a Swiss bank account
Hansen went ahead anyhow and opened two
bank accounts in Switzerland on his own
one at Credit Suisse
and the other at Bank Lloyd meanwhile in
its search for the mole who had been
funneling vast numbers of Secrets to
Moscow the FBI went to great lengths to
follow up the intelligence it had
received that the traitor had been paid
in diamonds we sent a whole squad to New
York visiting Hasidic Jews in the
diamond district on West 47th Street
Mike Rochford said we showed them
pictures of our top 20 suspects we asked
them if they recognized any one one or
two of the merchants said maybe they
recognized a picture but as it turned
out none were Hansen even though this
was not productive it had to be done
Rochford added ruefully I got to know
the diamond trade
