Epilogue
youtube.com/watch?v=oSoSQvjpUPQ

Robert Hanssen might still have
been free enjoying a quiet retirement in
the Virginia suburbs of Washington DC
his dual career as an FBI agent and
Russian spy safely behind him instead he
was caught convicted and sent away to
prison for life none of that would have
happened but for the work of four very
different men who came together in a way
that could not have been predicted one
was an FBI counter spy another a veteran
CIA clandestine officer a third was a
KGB officer imprisoned after being
falsely accused as an American agent the
fourth was the ex Russian operative who
became the seven million dollar spy
their disparate lives became
inextricably intertwined by a series of
threads that bound them tightly together
in an extraordinary journey of espionage
like no other Mike Rochford was the
counter spy who never gave up
despite the periodic pressure from FBI
headquarters to abandon his quixotic
quest for the mole his long pursuit
finally ended successfully in 2001 with
the arrest of Robert Hansen 27 times
Rochford had dangled a million dollars
before KGB officers in the hope of
identifying the mole inside US
intelligence nothing worked until the
28th spy the KGB officer whom the FBI
gave the codename mr. Pym Rochford x'
mole hunt went badly off track with
damaging results when he focused his
investigation on an innocent CIA officer
brian kelly although he later said he
greatly regretted his mistake and felt
guilty about it he persisted in his
search the stakes he said were too high
to stop in the end Rochford x' work his
determination and his ultimate success
were recognized by the US intelligence
community in the fall of 2001 he
received a secret medal from the CIA in
a secret ceremony at the agency's
Langley Virginia headquarter
about 200 people were gathered in the
bubble the domed auditorium next to CIA
headquarters for the ceremony
Stephen Capps the CIA's
counterintelligence chief presented the
award Rochford was also given a lapel
medal he was not allowed to wear the
citation praised him for his pivotal
role in the recruitment of the Russian
agent who was able to provide the
information that led to Hanson's
identification and successful
prosecution his recruitment of the
Russian was all the more remarkable in
that it was affected in a very short
period of time with a very temperamental
subject he turned a cold approach into a
fully accepted recruitment in a matter
of days it is no exaggeration to say
that there have been few if any examples
of Soviet Russian counterintelligence
recruitments in the history of the FBI
and CIA that compared with this effort
Brian Kelly died of a heart attack in
2011 at age 68 his family and many of
his friends believed that but for his
ordeal he might have enjoyed more years
I believe it shortened his life his wife
Patricia said trust and integrity were
the most important part of any job in
intelligence and to have the government
come down on him must have had a
profound impact his wife confronted Mike
Rochford at a panel on the Hanson case
in 2013 at the International Spy Museum
I was the other panelist as the author
of spy my 2002 book about the FBI man
the event was held by the National Law
Enforcement Museum during the question
period Patricia Kelly stood up poised
and composed and in a strong clear voice
she said I am Brian Kelly's Widow Brian
was for three to four years 24 hours a
day seven days a week
under surveillance including helicopters
false flags and polygraphs he was walked
out of the agency for 18 months he was
out in the cold he was never charged but
he
suspected of espionage his daughter and
his two sons were interrogated this was
all like a movie why did the FBI
investigate him so aggressively she
wanted to know when it had no evidence
he was a spy my second question and this
is for mr. Rochford on November 15 2000
you heard the tape and the voice was not
of Brian Kelly but of Robert Hanssen why
then she asked did the FBI leave Brian
out in the cold for another three months
until Hanson's arrest before finally
clearing him she added thank you for
stating publicly in this forum that the
FBI was wrong in reply Rochford candidly
admitted his mistake and the FBI's it's
been a long time coming for public
acknowledgment by the bureau that we
were wrong
he said he then cited one coincidence
that had fueled the FBI suspicion Hanson
had used the deaddrop prime in Nodaway
Park 17 times with the KGB in his first
year of spying and that's where Brian
did his running it was hardly a reason
to justify Kelly being walked out of the
CIA but Rochford said the FBI
investigation was based on a sincere
honest belief the US would continue to
lose sources unless the traitor was
found he blamed the CIA for the three
months that elapsed before Kelly learned
that the real mole had been arrested but
said that the FBI had agreed to the
delay the CIA he said argued that if
Kelly the prime suspect was brought back
to the agency
Hanson might know and break off contact
with the Russians defeating the FBI's
hope to catch him at a dead drop I'm
sorry for all the pain that was brought
to you and your family Rochford said he
said to me later it was an important
thing for her to hear she came up to me
afterwards and said it meant a lot to me
it was the first time anyone from the
bureau had said that Mike Rochford
retired from the FBI in 2004 after
uncovering Hansen
the mole who had spied for Moscow over a
period of twenty two years Hanson's
father like Rochefort's was a Chicago
police officer
the irony did not escape Rochford the
veteran CIA clandestine officer Jack
Platt although long retired played a key
role in the recruitment of Aleksandr
Shcherbakov mr. Pym who provided the file
that led to Hanson's downfall Platt the
ex-marine forged a unique friendship
with the KGB's Gennady vasilenko that
transcended the Cold War in time they
became business partners in the Hamilton
trading group inc their private security
company Platt was on a business trip to
Moscow in 1999 to meet with vasilenko
when the crucial but unexpected events
unfolded he was representing himself he
said emphatically and not any US
intelligence agency he had cut all ties
with the CIA after he retired 12 years
earlier in Moscow Platt met with
vasilenko in the offices of security a
private investigative agency headed by
an ex-kgb agent vasilenko had previously
worked at the security company for
several years Shcherbakov had a desk and
a telephone at the firm but his future
there uncertain he approached vasilenko
and asked if he would introduce him to
Platt bustle Yenko did but did not stay
for their meeting in their talk
Shcherbakov pleaded with Platt to
introduce him to other American
businessmen he said he hoped to export
Russian artifacts to the u.s. at the
time Russians could not easily leave to
travel abroad without a reason
Shcherbakov
entreated Platt to arrange for a
business contact to invite him to New
York that he explained would provide the
pretext he needed to travel overseas
Platt was non-committal but said he
would look into it Gennady vasilenko did
not know that his casual introduction of
Alexander Shcherbakov
to Jack Platt would set in motion a
chain of events that would
alter the history of u.s.
counterintelligence and lead to the
arrest of the super mole inside the FBI
at the time Platt had no way of knowing
that either but there was great irony in
the fact that it was vasilenko who took
the initial step that led to the
apprehension of Robert Hansen when Jack
Platt was a CIA officer he had tried for
years to recruit vasilenko with no
success
when Platt met with vasilenko in Guiana
he dutifully wrote a memo of their
conversation a copy of his cable about
that October 1987 meeting was seen by
Hansen who misunderstood the contents
and reported to the KGB erroneously that
vasilenko had been recruited when the
KGB saw Hansen's mistaken report it
lured vasilenko to Havana broke his arm
shipped him off to LeFort ovo prison for
months of interrogation and fired him
the payback took 14 years but in 2001
vasilenko had the satisfaction of
knowing that by introducing Shcherbakov
to Platt he had played a crucial role in
the detection and capture of Robert
Hansen there were others who played an
important role in the spy drama in
particular William Stout the curator at
the Frick Collection to assist the FBI
where he had once been a language
specialist and supervisor he invited
Shcherbakov to come to New York to
discuss importing Russian artifacts
which he had no intention of doing when
they met Stout played his part of a
businessman perfectly then walked
offstage and vanished Shcherbakov was
momentarily buoyed by the encouragement
he received from stout but his bubble
quickly burst in the person of Mike
Rochford his dismay at being tricked was
eased by a lobster dinner and generous
amounts of Tullamore Dew and finally by
a very large amount of money Stout was
the quiet unsung hero in the operation
that led to the capture of Hansen Jack
Platt died on January 4th 2017
at age 80 he didn't know at first that
he was ill but then went quickly in a
week more than once in the past he and
his wife Paige had talked about life and
death
both of us agreed that the important
thing was quality of life not longevity
when he became ill the doctors had
proposed various heroic measures
he looked at me Paige said and shook his
head and told the docs and friends in
the room that he'd had a great run on
this earth for 80 years and had no wish
to live as an invalid he died without
pain and as he wished it was Swift
Jack said that is how he would like to
go it was the way he wanted Gennady
vasilenko was imprisoned again by the
Russians in 2005 on trumped-up charges
but in 2010 he was among four persons
released from prison and traded by
Moscow for 10 illegals in the US who
posed as Americans but were Russian
spies the press did not focus on why
Moscow was willing to trade vasilenko
who had never been recruited to spy for
the US but the KGB must have suspected
that vasilenko had played a key role in
sureba coughs file ending up in the
hands of the FBI in the CIA
that is why Washington wanted him
included in the trade he lives now in
the u.s. a happy man and free at last
Sergei V scruple a former Russian spy
who secretly worked for British
intelligence was one of the three
persons held by Moscow and traded with
vasilenko for the ten Russian illegals
arrested in the US in the big spy swap
of 2010 eight years later scruple became
the center of an international incident
in March 2018 he and his daughter Yulia
were found unconscious slumped on a
bench in the sleepy Cathedral town of
Salsbury England 85 miles southwest of
London they had both been poisoned with
nova chuck a super lethal nerve gas
secretly developed in the soviet union
nova chuck was created in 1970
three by two scientists Petr Petrovich
karpachev
and Vladimir I live at Chicana won a
secret Russian military nerve gas
laboratory on the Volga River near the
city of Volsky after the attack on scrip
all Russia denied knowing anything about
Nova Chuck for decades Moscow has
concealed the deadly nerve agent from
the world almost all nations including
Russia and the United States have signed
the Chemical Weapons Convention an
international treaty that requires the
signatories to disclose and destroy all
stocks of such weapons Russia has said
it destroyed almost 40,000 metric tons
of chemical weapons under the treaty
including sarin VX and somin
conspicuously absent from the list was
Nova Chuck since Moscow will not admit
possessing it the amount of NOAA chuck
stockpiled in Russia is unknown but even
the 1000 tonnes believed to have been
initially produced in the 1970s would be
enough to kill several hundred thousand
people scream all 66 a former member of
the GRU Soviet military intelligence had
begun spying for Britain in 1995 he was
caught and convicted in a Russian Court
in 1966 after he was released in the spy
swap he lived quietly in Southbury
apparently believing he was beyond the
long arm of the KGB but after he and his
daughter were poisoned the British prime
minister Theresa May accused the Russian
government of launching the attack and
expelled 23 Russian diplomats in London
who had been identified as intelligence
officers Russia soon retaliated by
expelling 23 diplomats from the British
Embassy in Moscow but the reaction by
London was only the beginning of world
outrage at the blatant poisoning of the
former Russian intelligence officer on
British soil on March 27th the United
States ordered the expulsion of 60
Russian a fish
and closed the Russian consulate in
Seattle the US move was coordinated with
two dozen other countries including
major European nations among them France
Germany and Italy who expelled large
numbers of Russians altogether more than
150 Russian officials were sent packing
Moscow retaliated two days later
expelling 60 American diplomats and
closing the US consulate in st.
Petersburg Russia also said it would
expel the same number of Western
diplomats as those countries had sent
home to Moscow the mass explosions on
both sides raised the level of tension
between the US and Russia two levels not
seen since the height of the Cold War
the British prime minister Theresa May
said it was highly likely that the nerve
gas came from Russia and the British
Foreign Secretary said the assassination
attempt was likely to have been ordered
by russia's President Vladimir V Putin a
former KGB operative putin's
spokesperson claimed Russia was not
involved the assault on the screep house
echoed the murder in London in 2006 of
Alexander V Litvinenko a former officer
of the FSB one of the successors to the
KGB and a critic of President Putin he
had been killed with radioactive
polonium-210 after he had a cup of tea
with a known Russian intelligence agent
felix bloch suspected of spying for the
KGB but never charged was dismissed from
the State Department he worked in Chapel
Hill North Carolina as a checker in a
supermarket and then as a city bus
driver Alexander's a Borowski code name
max the KGB colonel who secretly spied
for the CIA
later defected to the US but when he
went to Moscow on a visit in 2001 he was
arrested by the Russians and sentenced
to 18 years in prison for treason in
2010 he returned to the u.s. freed is
part of a trade for the 10 Russian
illegals arrested by the FBI
the same spy trade that freed Gennady
vasilenko and sergey skripnikov Lawrence
Colorado the most severe prison in the
u.s. to serve his life sentence harsh
extra additional restrictions known as
Sam were imposed on him by order of
successive US attorneys general
Alexander Shcherbakov made it to New York
but he was approached by Rochford and
soon realized that he was the target of
an intelligence operation that had lured
him from Moscow to the u.s. Rochford
wined and dined and drank with him for
two weeks and gradually gained his
confidence under a death threat from the
Russian mafia over a failed caviar deal
Shcherbakov decided it was finally time
to sell the KGB file he had carefully
hidden for so long in Moscow when he
revealed he had the secret file on the
mole inside US intelligence the
disclosure stunned Rochford the FBI and
the CIA with Shcherbakov Rochford worked
out the unprecedented terms for the file
and the Russian left for Moscow with a
large upfront payment and a promise that
he would eventually pocket millions
which he did after several false starts
Shcherbakov turned over the secret file
to the CIA his work done
the ex-kgb man left Moscow for the last
time he was sailing into uncharted
waters leaving behind his country his
entire world all that was known and
familiar to him a lifetime it is an
agonizing excruciating decision for any
defector no matter how rich his
financial reward mr. Pym had crossed
over and there could be no turning back
once safely in the US with the file in
the hands of the FBI Shcherbakov embarked
on his new life in America as a
multi-millionaire with the help of the
CIA his extended family joined him in
the u.s. where he lived with a new
identity under the protection of the CIA
and with 7 million dollars
