Note from the Author
youtube.com/watch?v=stBChMi-4yM

when I wrote my book spy
the inside story of how the FBI's Robert
Hansen betrayed America I revealed that
a KGB officer was paid seven million
dollars for the secret file on the mole
inside US intelligence who had been
feeding thousands of Secrets to Moscow
for more than two decades the KGB did
not even know the identity of their
prized mole but the file contained
enough clues to lead eventually to his
capture but my disclosure left a tangle
of mysteries and unanswered questions
who was the man whom I came to think of
as the seven million dollar spy what was
his true identity how could he possibly
have access to and smuggle out what had
to be the most highly sensitive secret
file in the heavily guarded headquarters
of the KGB's Foreign Intelligence arm in
Yasin AVO outside Moscow knowing the
immense value of the file why did he
wait four years before reaching the
perilous decision to sell it to the FBI
and the CIA how was he persuaded 
to take that huge risk
how did us counter spies ever find him
how did they know he even existed how
could they possibly know he actually had
obtained the secret KGB file and how did
the file eventually reach the u.s. I was
determined to find the answers to these
and other questions that arose from my
initial disclosure in 2002 I realized
that a major and complex u.s.
counterintelligence operation must be
hidden somewhere below the surface of
these astonishing events I was not sure
I could as an outsider penetrate the
veil of secrecy and bring the full
remarkable counterintelligence story to
the public but I had to try after six
years of research and countless
interviews with trusted sources in the
US intelligence community
I had my answers they are here in the
seven million dollar spy I thank the
many spies and former spies who were
willing to help me tell this story
many agreed to speak with me only on
condition that they would not be
identified but they know who they are
and I am grateful to them among those I
am able to thank publicly I must start
with Michael Rochford the FBI's veteran
counter spy weary at first when I
approached him he came to accept albeit
reluctantly that the counterintelligence
coup in which he was the major actor was
a story that could finally be told
although Rochford pursued the wrong
suspect for several years his skill and
determination ultimately led to the
capture of the real mole like a sheriff
in the old Wild West he got his man
moreover Rochford had the grace publicly
to apologize to the widow of brian kelly
the innocent suspects whose career had
been grievously damaged and to admit
that the FBI had been wrong an omission
almost unheard of by a bureaucracy in
Washington without the key role played
by John C Platt the deadly mole burrowed
deep inside the FBI for two decades
would never have been caught Jack Platt
an ex-marine and extraordinary CIA
officer was unlike any other I have
known no rulebook inhibited his
irreverent and innovative approach to
his craft he knew my books and helped me
from the start I can never repay his
trust and friendship for which I will
always be enduringly grateful I also owe
a special thanks to Gennady vasilenko
the remarkable former KGB officer who
played an essential role in uncovering
the seven million dollar Spy wrongfully
identified to the KGB as an American
agent he was horribly mistreated during
five years in the Russian prison system
yet he emerged without bitterness to
embark on his new life in the u.s. I
greatly appreciate his trust and
willingness to tell his story to me in
the course of my research I learned that
William G Stout a curator at the Frick
Collection had agreed to pose as an
importer of Russian artifacts to assist
the FBI counterintelligence operation
that
Lord the seven million dollar spy to New
York although his role has never
previously been disclosed he consented
to speak to me and I remain grateful for
his cooperation and help several others
shared their wisdom and knowledge with
me among them Val Excel yangko Patricia
McCarthy Kelly Robert H King David G
major dan Malvina
James D Olsen Paige Platt Michael J wags
PAC and Leslie G Weiser jr. I could
always count on my son John for sound
advice that I greatly appreciated most
of all I thank my wife Joan my PolarStar
who shared the voyage of six long years
as I brought this ship into port and to
whom this book is lovingly dedicated
David wise Washington DC may 2018 this
has been an audible Studios production
of the 7 million dollar spy how one
determined investigator 7 million
dollars and a death threat by the
Russian mafia led to the capture of the
most dangerous mole ever unmasked inside
US intelligence
