Jun 5, 2017
Chris Matthews to Carter Page: Why Are You Hiding?
finance.yahoo.com/news/chris-matthews-carter-page-why-160241721.html

I'm here Putin said that American
journalist megyn kelly had no right to
ask him about charges his regime was
repressive and killed journalists let's
watch that exchange from last night many
Americans hear the name Vladimir Putin
and they think he runs a country full of
corruption a country in which
journalists who are too critical
could wind up murdered a country in
which dissidents could wind up in jail
or worse - people who believe that what
is your message yellow juice collage - I
want to say that Russia is developing
along a democratic path that is certain
even no one should have any doubt about
that which why do you feel you have the
right to ask us these kinds of questions
they young and do it all the time not to
moralize and to give us lessons on how
to live megiddo we're ready to listen to
comments up the income that don't have
done constructively - the bullet with
the goal of establishing a relationship
creating a common environment you know
atmosphere oh no Meah but we will
absolutely not accept when these sorts
of things are used as an instrument of
political conflict each escaped by
debris I want everyone to know that what
that's our message Wow I'm joined now by
Carter pace former foreign policy
advisor the Trump campaign Carter who do
you agree with there you think of the
deployed Amir Putin or is right in
saying we have no right to question him
Chris if he were asked that question
once that would be fine if he's asked
that or if there's allegations
constantly every day in all the major
newspapers in the United States and all
the major cable networks after months
and months and years and years and
decades on end
then it becomes a little old you could
imagine if somewhat sure but if it's
true it should be old it should be
relentless do you believe he does kill
reporters who he doesn't like I don't
know anything about they don't know let
me tell you think he's innocent ooh that
I think that it's interesting with the
January 6 Intel report one of the big
thing they're talking about is that the
Russian government shouldn't put out
that certain quote-unquote propaganda
all of the Russian RT and Sputnik
the information in there at least about
myself was infinitely more accurate than
you know how RT as a propaganda arm of
this of the Russian government all I
know is that the information they were
putting out was but you know you're an
expert what do you mean you don't know
whether a propaganda arm
well it's infinite all I know is that
it's infinitely more accurate then
that's the way that my question is it a
propaganda or Marty I think it's less of
a proper it's equally property
propagandist or less propagandistic than
Radio Free europe/radio Liberty which in
September and again in November was just
repeating the dodgy da Sierra is a
feeling from how you're singing from
what Vladimir Putin just said in the
interview last night that he believes
that maybe you did too that the bad
relations between the United States and
Moscow right now are caused by American
media no I don't I don't that's he see
me saying that no I think that's a one
symptom of a larger illness which goes
back many many decades so do you think
we should have better relations with
Russia
absolutely is that why you went to work
for Trump I I believe in a lot of your
likely Trump was saying I like more
broadly in terms of his foreign policy I
think he's really trying to make some
significant steps for it what would you
say do is a Russian expert that's how
you got in the door right no I it's
funny I'm always branded as such the
number of times I talked about Russia
proportionally is minuscule partially
because these false allegations started
against me
from the very beginning well anyway
let's talk about Putin again he also
suggested the 2016 hacking might have
been carried out by an American
intelligence agency let's watch that
they can even be hackers by the way in
the United States
Kotori very skillfully and
professionally shifted the blame as we
say unto Russia there is a theory that
Kennedy's assassination was arranged by
the United States intelligence services
so leave this theory is correct and that
can't be ruled out then what could be
easier during this day and age then
using all the technical means at the
disposal of the intelligence services
and using those means to organize some
attacks and then pointing the finger
Russia we make it right well if let's
see what happens with these allegations
regarding the FISA warrant against now
let's make it what'd he make what he
said today see if the CIA killed Kenny
which I don't believe is true then they
might have been a might have done the
hacking not him do you think he did the
hacking has come up with this cockamamie
story about conspiracy to get out of it
well all I know you believe he did
hacking I've been hacked everybody that
do you believe that the Russians hacked
into the DNC and the rest of the effort
to try to manipulate this election I'm
not fully convinced about I'm not going
to assume I think January 6 was largely
a political stunt what's that
just the two months two weeks before the
election with without much much basis I
think there's a lot of I have a lot of
questions about that January 6 report
the report the DM 6 the DNI report ok
let me ask you about trouble you know so
in other words the whole American
storyline that there are 17 US
intelligence agency said the Russians
hacked into our system and tried to
manipulate our election you don't
believe I think that's I haven't said
all I know is that the accusations and
the against myself which is a part of
this overall Intel story was totally
well let's talk about that wrong then
let's talk about let's talk about the
encounter you had with Kissel like the
Russian ambassador you met with him in
Cleveland during the Republican National
Convention fair enough and here's how
former campaign adviser JD gordon
described your involvement in that
meeting in political march quote Gordon
said page and kiss alike that's you and
kiss like spoke at some length about how
to improve relations between the two
countries when it's just like
counterterrorism and energy security
Carter told him we should have a new
chapter of us-russian relations that
build on mutual respect and common goals
that there is no need to keep up this
hostility Gordon said is that true I I
don't recall that conversation there
were brief interactions at reception
that's not a brief interaction I I never
had any what you say you say was a
casual hello how are you at the same
time you said you made a deal at the end
of the meeting was off the record no no
that was the deal from the beginning
everyone in that meeting was I never
shake hands with somebody had them say
this hand shaking is off the record
no no that everyone in that meeting they
was agreed that yes
yeah how was that agreement struck well
it was some well said that are getting
yeah at the and who made the
announcement I actually came in late but
that was speaking of the organizers they
who were the organizers
yeah I I forget they're there know who
you were meeting with a bunch of
Russians including kiss likely ended at
the Republican convention and you don't
remember who is he only he's already to
the meeting i I can't even recall you
can't recall invited to a meeting with
the Russian ambassador oh it wasn't a
meeting with the Russian ambassador
Chris it was meetings with ambassador's
from her this is what squirrely about
your argument here it was no big deal
was just hello how are you but it was
off the record we agreed to make it off
the record off what's off the record
there journalism off the record a
semantically meaning you can't use it in
this story you can know it of course but
you can't use it there's a lot of
there's a lot of meetings that think
tanks etc that sometimes are either not
for attribution or off the record and
that's the one was it a sensitive
discussion no I think it's well record
why would you say off the record to
allow people to have a open discussion
without having it probably machination
know you didn't talk about sanctions did
you talk about improved Russian
relations with the United States
I depend with a Russian ambassador I
can't recall any did you talk about the
Ukraine and our sanctions because of
that definitely not you didn't talk
about that you didn't talk about that
you didn't talk about the stories that
the DNC had been hacked into that hadn't
even happened yet they really think that
yeah they had it then so what was the
conversation about you say it's off the
record you do you remember the
conversation I the most interesting cut
the Republican convention errata there
were a lot of policy discussions in
general throughout the that week to me
that was the thing that I was most
focused on unfortunately we're not able
to talk about let's try to polish the
context of your thinking Carter you're a
PhD right yeah and what's your PhD in in
Central Asia okay so you're an expert
that part of the world over there the
Crimea and all that stuff and you
you you join the Trump campaign Eddie
Cox a good guide lawyer in New York
helped you get in the door you show up
what was your motive enjoying the Trump
campaign you like this general world
view right my nationalism it's not now
their own that says what did what do you
like about him I liked this this whole
the Russia issue frankly is very similar
to the Iraq issue in the 2008 Obama
campaign he wanted to start a new step
forward in terms of their what was going
on in Iraq pulling out from this
constant conflict we've had over here my
view and I have always believed that and
I believe this to this day he has
tremendous potential to actually do that
and I think there's there's school
that's a pretty worthy goal
absolutely well and why largely we can't
talk about that because we haven't we're
swirling around good thank you is it
you're one of the figures in it or the
news reporting you're one of the names
like Manafort and Clint I keep hearing
about it struck me from the outside
looking at this that what you guys were
trying to do with Trump's leadership was
to try to restart our relations with
Russia and try to avoid a second Cold
War and the idea you're shaking it yes
or no I can't read it it's not that it's
not that central of an argument I mean
that part part of what all these
meetings about what was your in but why
were you brought into the campaign if it
wasn't because you have a red shirt
Russian expertise I I can't speak to
that credit I have done a lot in
international relations going back
throughout most of my life since serving
in the Navy sends us Russia arms control
negotiations in the Pentagon I done tens
of billions of dollars of energy deals
so yeah but so you won't tell us about
what happened to me because you don't
remember it or you don't care it's a big
part of you sir
well you don't think it's important to
tell anybody this I know I think it's
not an important part of the story it's
important enough for you guys to say
this is off the record nobody talked
about what we had this meeting I'm being
respectful
okay discussion you've made some charges
about people coming after you and I
don't know you seem like okay to me but
you're blaming people coming at you
because you're Catholic and I find that
quizzical why would you say something
like that in the 21st century there's an
anti Catholicism in American politics
explain its
somewhat of a long story but it's there
were interactions with members of the
Clinton campaign which where I got that
impression it's a long story
give me a shirt give me the short
version what what did they say again
should it make you think was religion it
was bad thank you I think there's a lot
of circumstantial evidence I'll get into
it
well no here you are you've said this
judge I find it hard to believe I mean
our arguments about same-sex there's
arguments about abortion rights these
alright audience were all familiar with
we argue with about them in the public
square there's nothing weird about their
good arguments yeah people argue what's
the argument that you felt was coming
against you well I've had a number of
discussions with Madeleine Albright and
she had you know I had mentioned a
number of times the fact that I got my
masters and national security at
Georgetown one of the things that I was
really inspired by being back after I
haven't spent four years at the Naval
Academy government institution where
it's non-religious is well they have a
famous party service called and it's a
very famous school well and I was
inspired to being back part of the
Catholic community and suffice to say I
just didn't uh there were issues from
that discussion where I didn't feel
comfortable I think she was raised
Catholic anyway but you felt I was near
that Catholic thing this whole thing you
think is anti real I know I think look
it's hard to just differentiate when
there was definitely a lot of hatred
sent against me the Catholic thing is is
actually something which is covered
under Civil Rights Act yeah if it's true
and you think it is true you think you
did a victim of religious prejudice I
think there's a lot of prejudices and I
but to me the bigger prejudice the more
immediate thing is the bigotry and
xenophobia against Russians and I think
that's unfortunately been okay my big
crisis whole thing if his goal the
candidate you supported Trump if his
goal was to reestablish something beyond
the Cold War something that was a good
relation between US and Russia if that
was the goal and all these meetings that
went on with man afford all these
meetings with Flynn and yourself and
anybody else in rollbase means you won't
tell me what happened that
if the whole purpose of that was a
rapprochement between these two great
countries why wouldn't you brag about
instead of hiding with all this stuff
about immunity and all this talk about
Fifth Amendment rights and executive
privilege Kelly Conway stymied Kelly is
about everything is trying to be hiding
why are you hiding if it was such a
grand purpose which was peace Chris it's
been an ongoing assault for instance why
don't you say what you were doing why
you had a meeting nothing you have a
meeting you won't tell me about remember
this the Russian ambassador at the
Republican convention when they're
shifting language about about the
Ukraine and all kinds of stuff with
Crimea in the platform and you won't
tell me what the meeting was about the
meeting was about nothing I mean it why
was a secret why is it off the record
because the Russians have been lied to
with NATO expansion is a key element
okay they were told at the end of the
Cold War that we're not going to expand
NATO well it was a verb all it was
nothing legally not even the Baltic
States that's at the Baltic States were
going to join NATO but good well
eventually not yeah once they change the
Ukraine really under George Oh Gorbachev
and Reagan you know Tip O'Neill was
involved in terms of helping to push
this forward
come on now today Ukraine just in terms
of you're helping to encourage some
steps forward initially felt that was it
do you felt that was a threat to Russia
well I think if there was a better
relationship could you imagine if Tip
O'Neill ever tried doing what Harry Reid
did to me last year what did it mean
sending a letter to the FBI director
saying let's please investigate this guy
because he's a he owns a few shares in
Gazprom
you know though I mean could you imagine
what would Reagan but okay okay look
everyone every project with my old boss
would think about something all these
years later but let me ask you your
bottom sentiment about this you think
the United States and Russia should get
together you think that was the whole
effort all the Trump people were
involved the net I don't think that's
the whole and what is it what's behind
it what's the big elephant in the room
we're trying to figure out here because
everybody's trying to Saturday Jeff and
Chris that's all in other words your
meetings the secret meetings didn't
accomplish anything nothing happened
absolutely not
nothing I was like y'all had more a goal
which is to improve our relations Russia
Manafort I think was somewhat related
Flynn was certainly related to that what
were they all doing I don't think I
think it's totally so you agree with a
lot of air Putin last night with Megan
saying there's nothing to it's nonsense
you agree nothing I haven't seen
anything and it'll be interesting to see
if anyone ever comes out with anything
well Comey thinks there's something
there he'll be testifying Thursday and I
think there's a lot of people to think
of something there well I don't think
there's something there our intelligence
agencies believe the Russians messed
with us meddle in our election you don't
agree with that well I hope I hope we
find out about the wiretapping since
that was done against me yeah it's very
damn can't fight in your fight
